Colorless, odorless, and poisonous, carbon monoxide is one of the six major air pollutants regulated in the United States and in many other nations around the world. When carbon-based fuels, such as coal, wood, and oil, burn incompletely or inefficiently, they produce carbon monoxide. The gas is spread by winds and circulation patterns throughout the lower atmosphere (called the troposphere).

These maps show monthly averages of global concentrations of tropospheric carbon monoxide at an altitude of about 12,000 feet. The data were collected by the MOPITT (Measurements Of Pollution In The Troposphere) sensor on NASA’s Terra satellite. Concentrations of carbon monoxide are expressed in parts per billion by volume (ppbv). A concentration of 1 ppbv means that for every billion molecules of gas in the measured volume, one of them is a carbon monoxide molecule. Yellow areas have little or no carbon monoxide, while progressively higher concentrations are shown in orange and red. Places where the sensor didn’t collect data, perhaps due to clouds, are gray.

In different parts of the world and in different seasons, the amounts and sources of atmospheric carbon monoxide change. In Africa, for example, the seasonal shifts in carbon monoxide are tied to the widespread agricultural burning that shifts north and south of the equator with the seasons. Fires are an important source of carbon monoxide pollution in other regions of the Southern Hemisphere, such as the Amazon and Southeast Asia.

In the United States, Europe, and eastern China, on the other hand, the highest carbon monoxide concentrations occur around urban areas as a result of vehicle and industrial emissions. Fires burning over large areas in North America and Russia in some years can be an important source. The MOPITT observations often show that pollution emitted on one continent can travel across oceans to have a big impact on air quality on other continents.

Carbon monoxide is a trace gas in the atmosphere, and it does not have a direct effect on the global temperature, like methane and carbon dioxide do. However, carbon monoxide plays a major role in atmospheric chemistry, and it affects the ability of the atmosphere to cleanse itself of many other polluting gases. In combination with other pollutants and sunshine, it also takes part in the formation of lower-atmospheric (“bad”) ozone and urban smog.

The concentration of carbon monoxide in Earth's atmosphere had been increasing mainly because of increased human activities. However, some recent surface measurements show a leveling off of the carbon monoxide concentration. The full range of the effects of the increased concentration of carbon monoxide is not fully understood at the present time, but it is believed that carbon monoxide is photochemically active and plays a major part in the concentration of OH radicals in the troposphere. Increased carbon monoxide may deplete tropospheric OH radicals, thereby reducing the yearly removal of many natural and anthropogenic trace species. In particular, this effect may add to the increase of methane, which in turn could further reduce OH concentration.

Increased carbon monoxide may also indirectly intensify global warming and perturb the stratospheric ozone layer by increasing the lifetime of trace gases such as methane and chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs). Global measurements of carbon monoxide and methane (also measured by MOPITT) will undoubtedly shed light on the concentration of OH, which is one of the most important and difficult species to measure from space due to its very low concentration. Those measurements will enhance our knowledge of the chemistry of the troposphere, and particularly how it interacts with the surface/ocean/biomass systems, atmospheric transports, and the carbon cycle.

Global carbon monoxide and CH4 measurements from MOPITT will also be used in parallel modeling efforts to advance our understanding of global tropospheric chemistry and its relationship to sources, sinks, and atmospheric transports, which can be determined from other data. Understanding their biogeochemical cycles and their intimate interrelation with each other and with climate will lead to better predictions of possible effects of anthropogenic activities.

The MOPITT Level-2 carbon monoxide data product consists of the geolocated, retrieved carbon monoxide profiles and total column amounts for carbon monoxide and methane. The horizontal footprint of each MOPITT retrieval is 22 kilometers by 22 kilometers. Ancillary data concerning surface properties and cloud conditions at the locations of the retrieved parameters are also included. MOPITT geophysical parameters are derived from the Level-1B radiances in combination with ancillary data describing the global distribution of surface and atmospheric temperature and humidity.

Radiance measurements in the 4.7-micrometer carbon monoxide band provide the primary information on the vertical carbon monoxide mixing ratio profile in the troposphere. Total column abundances of carbon monoxide and methane are derived primarily using measurements of reflected solar radiation in 2 bands near 2.3 micrometers, and best retrievals thus occur in sunlit portions of the orbits. Clouds have a large influence on the observed radiances and their effects must be modeled appropriately in the retrieval algorithms.

Colorless, odorless, and poisonous, carbon monoxide is one of the six major air pollutants regulated in the United States and in many other nations around the world. When carbon-based fuels, such as coal, wood, and oil, burn incompletely or inefficiently, they produce carbon monoxide. The gas is spread by winds and circulation patterns throughout the lower atmosphere (called the troposphere).

These data sets show monthly averages of global concentrations of tropospheric carbon monoxide at an altitude of about 12,000 feet. The data were collected by the MOPITT (Measurements Of Pollution In The Troposphere) sensor on NASA's Terra satellite. Concentrations of carbon monoxide are expressed in parts per billion by volume (ppbv). A concentration of 1 ppbv means that for every billion molecules of gas in the measured volume, one of them is a carbon monoxide molecule. In these maps, carbon monoxide concentrations are shown in different colors. Blue areas have little or no carbon monoxide, while progressively higher concentrations are show in green, yellow, orange, and red.

In different parts of the world and in different seasons, the amounts and sources of atmospheric carbon monoxide change. In Africa, for example, the seasonal shifts in carbon monoxide are tied to the widespread agricultural burning that shifts north and south of the equator with the seasons. Fires are an important source of carbon monoxide pollution in other regions of the Southern Hemisphere.

In the United States, Europe, and eastern Asia, on the other hand, the highest carbon monoxide concentrations occur around urban areas as a result of vehicle and industrial emissions. Fires burning over large areas in North America and Russia in some years can be an important source. The MOPITT observations often show that pollution emitted on one continent can travel across oceans to have a big impact on air quality on other continents.

Carbon monoxide is a trace gas in the atmosphere, and it does not have a direct effect on the global temperature, like methane and carbon dioxide do. However, carbon monoxide plays a major role in atmospheric chemistry, and affects the ability of the atmosphere to cleanse itself of many other polluting gases. In combination with other pollutants and sunshine, it also takes part in the formation of toxic, lower-atmospheric ozone and urban smog. The growing data series from MOPITT shows seasonal and annual variations in carbon monoxide, providing clues about how our planet may be changing.

Colorless, odorless, and poisonous, carbon monoxide is a gas that comes from burning fossil fuels, like the gas in cars, and burning vegetation. Carbon monoxide is not one of the gases that is causing global warming, but it is one of the air pollutants that leads to smog. These data sets show monthly averages of carbon monoxide across the Earth measured by the Measurements of Pollution In The Troposphere (MOPITT) sensor on NASA's Terra satellite. Different colors show different amounts of the gas in the troposphere, the layer of the atmosphere closest to the Earth's surface, at an altitude of about 12,000 feet.