Nine in ten major outages in the US have been caused by hurricanes. Long-term outage risk is a function of climate change-triggered shifts in hurricane frequency and intensity; yet projections of both remain highly uncertain. However, outage risk models do not account for the epistemic uncertainties in physics-based hurricane projections under climate change, largely due to the extreme computational complexity. Instead they use simple probabilistic assumptions to model such uncertainties. Here, we propose a transparent and efficient framework to, for the first time, bridge the physics-based hurricane projections and intricate outage risk models. We find that uncertainty in projections of the frequency of weaker storms explains over 95% of the uncertainty in outage projections; thus, reducing this uncertainty will greatly improve outage risk management. We also show that the expected annual fraction of affected customers exhibits large variances, warranting the adoption of robust resilience investment strategies and climate-informed regulatory frameworks.

Introduction
Energy infrastructure is the backbone of our digital economy as well as societal health and safety, and uninterrupted access to electricity is essential for sustaining modern life2. Hurricanes are the leading cause of major power outages26 and have been responsible for over $900 billion in damage and thousands of fatalities in the US over the last 40 years30,36. In 2012, for example, Hurricane Sandy left over 8.5 million customers in the U.S. without power and caused over $7 billion in economic loss and 225 fatalities35.

In an effort to minimize the impact of hurricane-induced power outages, several research studies have developed forecast models to provide estimates of the extent of power outages prior to a storm landfall7,29,31,33,34,37. Such short-term forecasts allow utilities to improve their preparation, response and recovery efforts. They also allow emergency management and response agencies to better plan population evacuations and locate emergency shelters12,27,32. However, long term resilience investment decisions in electric power systems require the ability to credibly characterize long-term power outage risks, warranting the inclusion of climate change as a force affecting hurricane activity6.

There exists a significant body of literature on the relationship between climate change and hurricane activity, with most studies reporting a decrease in storm frequency due to climate change20,48,49,53. However, a non-trivial number of studies project an increase in frequency of hurricanes under similar future climate scenarios3,10,56. Different choices of climate models, initial parametrization of the models21, and spatial resolution of the models52 are among the reasons that cause such variability in projections of future hurricane activity. There is also much uncertainty about the projected future hurricane intensity under climate change. While there is consensus about an increase in future storm intensity, the extent of the projected increase varies among different studies20 ranging from 2 to 14%14,20,21,54. Importantly, regional predictions of hurricane activity under climate change depend on the pattern of warming and so may be fundamentally limited on these long timescales20,22. Thus, it is not clear that science will be able to reduce these epistemic uncertainties in the foreseeable future. Moreover, potential economic damages are known to increase with storm frequency and intensity19,39, including at the extremes4.

While many studies have investigated the impacts of climate change on electricity demand and supply28,38,41, very few have examined climate-change driven hurricane risk to electric power distribution systems12,47 which are most vulnerable to sever weather and climate events16. Resilient electric power infrastructure planning in hurricane prone regions hinges on the ability to systematically characterize and efficiently propagate the uncertainties in hurricane activity under climate change. However, existing approaches rely on computationally expensive methods, which limits their potential for adoption by local and regional planners as well as regulating agencies. Moreover, the physics-based projections of hurricane activity under climate change are not integrated into the existing hurricane outage risk models under climate change. Instead, simple probabilistic assumptions are made to perturb hurricane activity.

We address these fundamental gaps by proposing a transparent and efficient approach to, for the first time, link the knowledge provided by physics-based projections of hurricane activity under climate change with electric power distribution infrastructure risk models, providing a pathway for better integration of climate physics within intricate engineering risk models. We do this by coupling the latest synthesis of physics-based climate change projections with a validated power outage forecast model to predict the impact of future hurricane activity on coastal power distribution systems and then attribute the uncertainty in power outage risk to epistemic uncertainty in future frequency and intensity of hurricanes. Specifically, we utilize results from a recently-published study of projections of hurricane activity20 to quantify the uncertainty in these projections and fit parameterized distributions to future intensity and frequency of hurricanes. This allows us to efficiently propagate the uncertainty in projections through a validated hurricane-induced outage model13,47 in order to directly link changes in hurricane activity to outage risk. Particularly, we seek to answer two fundamental questions: (a) is long-term power outage risk driven primarily by climate change-triggered shifts in intensity or frequency?, and (b) what is the distribution of the expected annual outages due to climate change triggered shifts in hurricane frequency and intensity?

We find that hurricane-induced power outage risk under climate change is predominantly driven by the uncertainty in future frequency of hurricanes. Precisely, uncertainty in future projections of the frequency of hurricanes explains over 95% of the total uncertainty in future outage projections. We also show that the expected annual fraction of customers affected by power outage exhibit rather large variances. Given the multi-decadal timescales of power infrastructure planning, this wide range of possible future outcomes highlights the urgent need for a more robust approach for setting and enforcing reliability standards toward effective management of the power system under climate change.

Projected outage risk
To characterize long-term power outage risk, we first create a baseline scenario to represent present-day hurricane impacts on power distribution systems. The baseline scenario is generated by simulating 2000 years of storm-induced outages, using historical data and a validated outage forecast model13. To examine impacts under climate change then, our model takes as input three factors that define changes in hurricane activity and whose distributions are provided in a recent synthesis work20: the overall frequency factor, ffre, the frequency factor for intense storms, fsevfre, and the intensity factor, fint. Distinguishing between overall vs. intense storm frequency allows for shifts within the distribution toward higher-intensity storms. These factors represent fractional increases or decreases in their respective components in a future climate state. They are set to one under the baseline scenario and take uncertain values according to climate change projections. Their distributions may be directly estimated from the projections of hurricane activity under climate change. Here, we fit parameterized distributions to the data from the latest synthesis of physics-based climate change projections by Knutson et al.20 (see “Methods” for details). We then leverage an efficient methodology for stochastic computations59 to propagate the uncertainty in hurricane activity through the outage forecast model to evaluate future power outage risk and its range of uncertainties. Finally, we leverage global sensitivity analysis44 to investigate whether the uncertainty in long-term power outage risk is driven primarily by the uncertainty in future intensity or frequency (“Methods”). Our proposed framework is computationally efficient, and it offers a simple and transparent way for quantitative attribution of infrastructure impact risk to key parameters governing changes in hurricane activity. These key advantages render the framework ideal for decision-support tools under climate change and provide a path for integrating climate knowledge within infrastructure impact models to better inform planners, regulators, and policymakers.

To simulate the 2,000 years of storm-induced power outages under the baseline scenario, the frequency and intensity of hurricanes are sampled from historical distributions; i.e., the dashed line distributions in Fig. 1a,b. Landfall location is drawn from the historical record aggregated to 50km stretches of the coastline as shown by the circles in Fig. 1c. Hurricane tracks and wind fields (see thick black line with the gray band in Fig. 1c) are also modeled using historical data and then fed to a validated power outage forecast model13,47 (““Methods”) to estimate the outage risk in terms of the fraction of the population that loses power in each simulated storm (colored map in Fig. 1c). The fractions are finally aggregated across four distinct regions: the Gulf, upper Atlantic, lower Atlantic and Florida. Figure 2 depicts the distributions of the yearly fractions of customers affected by power outage in these four US regions for the baseline scenario. Based on these distributions, we calculate baseline statistics critical for decision making: the expected value, F¯, and the 95th percentile, F95, (see Supplementary Information for the latter) of the yearly fraction of affected population.

Figure 1
figure1
The schematic of the key sources of uncertainty in hurricane activity (a,b) and a typical outage map (inset) for a given simulated hurricane in the region under study (c). The intensity (a) and frequency (b) of landfalling hurricanes is perturbed from the baseline (dotted line) scenario in line with climate change projections to create future (solid line) scenarios. These scenarios simulate climate-perturbed distributions of tropical cyclone intensity and frequency which are used to simulate storm landfall along the Gulf and Atlantic coasts of the US (c). Note the distributions in (a,b) and the outage map depicted in the inset in (c) do not depict actual values. Plots a-b were created in R (v 3.2.1; https://www.r-project.org/)40 using the ggplot2 (v 3.3.0; https://ggplot2.tidyverse.org/)57. Plot (c) was created in R (v 3.2.1; https://www.r-project.org/)40 using the packages ggplot2 (v 3.3.0; https://ggplot2.tidyverse.org/)57 and usmap (v 0.5.0; https://github.com/pdil/usmap)8. Map shapefiles were from usmap and the US Census Bureau51.

Full size image
Figure 2
figure2
Distributions of the yearly fractions of customers without power in each coastal region under baseline scenario. Plots (a–d) were created in MATLAB R2016a.

Full size image
To perturb hurricane activity under climate change, we assign probability distributions to the frequency factor, the frequency factor for very severe storms, and the intensity factor, ffre, fsevfre and fint, based on the recently-published synthesis of future hurricane projections for a 2K global mean temperature increase by Knutson et al.20. Figure 3a–c, generated directly from the raw data (Knutson, pers. comm.), depict the variability in these factors for the North Atlantic basin. It can be seen that hurricane frequency is mostly projected to decrease, but the frequency of very intense storms, i.e., category 4 and 5, is expected to increase. Considering the longer upper tail of the distributions, we model each factor using shifted log-normal distributions with the same interquartile ranges as those reported in Knutson et al.20.

Given the probability distributions of the frequency factor, the frequency factor for intense storms, and the intensity factor, we obtain the probability distribution of expected yearly fraction of affected customers through building a Polynomial Chaos surrogate11,59 (“Methods”). Figure 4a shows the median, the interquartile range, and the 5th and 95th percentiles for the change in the expected yearly fraction of affected customers in the four considered regions. It is found that (see Supplementary Information) there is about 60–65% chance that the expected fraction of customers without power will decrease under climate change, in all regions. Importantly, the changes in the expected yearly fraction of affected customers for all regions exhibit rather large variances, with 90% confidence intervals that span a wide range from large (more than 30%) decreases to large (about 40%) increases. This large variability in the expected yearly fractions of impacted customers makes power system resilience planning and management especially challenging. Can we understand what causes such a large uncertainty?

Figure 3
figure3
Projected changes in hurricane frequency and intensity for the North Atlantic basin. (a) Box plots with interquartile ranges used to define the frequency factor, ffre, the frequency factor for intense storms, fsevfre, and the intensity factor, fint, (b–d) Histograms pertaining to the data for each factor taken from Figures 1–3 of Knutson et al.20 and the fitted shifted log-normal distributions. Plots (a–d) were created in MATLAB R2016a.

Full size image
To answer this question, we next investigate whether this long-term power outage risk is driven primarily by the uncertainty in future intensity or frequency. This is done through a global sensitivity analysis using Sobol’ sensitively indices45. The Sobol’ indices, illustrated in Fig. 4b, represent portions of variance of expected yearly impacted customers attributed to the uncertainty in frequency factor, the frequency factor for very severe storms, and the intensity factor. It can be seen that, in all four regions, more than 95% of variability in the expected yearly fraction of customers that experience power outage is caused by the uncertainty in frequency of non-intense tropical storms. Additionally, in all regions, more than 97% of observed variability in Fig. 4a is due to the uncertainty in future frequency of storms, i.e., both non-intense and intense storms. On the other hand, uncertainty in future intensity of storms barely contributes to the variability in the expected fraction of impacted costumers.

The non-significant contribution of uncertainty in the intensity of storms to power outage risk can be explained by the small variance of the change in future storm intensity. In fact, it is evident in Fig. 3a that the range of projected change in hurricane intensity in North Atlantic basin is relatively small. On the other hand, that same figure shows that the variability in projected climate change-triggered changes in the frequency of non-intense and intense storms is large. Yet, the variability in projected frequency of intense storms contributes to less than 3% of variability in power outage risk in all regions. This can be explained by the small frequency of intense storms for the baseline scenario with an average of 0.12 per year compared to 4.19 for non-intense storms. An extreme scenario of a 100% increase in the frequency of future storms, for instance, translates to average frequencies of 0.24 and 8.38 storms per year for intense and non-intense storms, respectively. Consequently, it is mainly the variability in future frequency of non-intense hurricanes which drives the uncertainty in the expected faction of affected customers. This suggests that more precise projections of the frequency of non-intense hurricanes are crucial to arrive at significantly improved predictions of hurricane-induced power outage risk under climate change.

Figure 4
figure4
Uncertainty quantification and sensitivity analysis of the expected yearly fraction of impacted customers under climate change. (a) Box plots of the change (w.r.t baseline scenario) in the expected yearly fraction of affected customers, F¯, for the four US regions. The figure shows the median, the interquartile range, the 5th and 95th percentiles of the change in the expected yearly fraction of customers that experience hurricane-induced power outage, given the uncertainty in the impact of climate change on frequency and intensity of storms, (b) Sobol’ global sensitivity indices characterizing the contribution of factors ffre, fsevfre and fint to the variance of the yearly fraction of costumers without power, F¯. The variability in hurricane frequency is the main contributor to the variance of F¯ in all four regions under consideration. Plots a-b were created in MATLAB R2016a.

Full size image
Discussion
Hurricanes are among the most costly and devastating natural hazards, wreaking havoc on the built environment each year. Climate change is projected to shift hurricane activity. However, there is little consensus on the degree of shifts in hurricane activity among different climate models and it is not clear whether science will be able to reduce this epistemic uncertainty anytime soon. These uncertainties may render the current long-term infrastructure resilience investments sub-optimal under climate change. Moreover, existing approaches for characterizing uncertainty in projected risk are computationally expensive “black boxes” that are not practical for use in long-term planning. In addition, there is often a disconnect between the physics-based climate projections and infrastructure risk models. We propose a novel and yet computationally cheap framework to propagate the uncertainties in climate projections to infrastructure risk models and to characterize the primary driver of uncertainty in hurricane-induced power outage risk. Specifically, we propagate the uncertainty in projection of future hurricane activity defined by a recently-published synthesis study20 to power outage risk under climate change using a validated state-of-the-art power outage model. While our uncertainty-informed analysis reveals a modest chance of decrease in the expected yearly fraction of affected customers under climate change, we also find a very wide range of outcomes, from more than 30% decrease to about 40% increase, which translates to significant risk for long-term power grid planning. Specifically, this variability needs to be accounted for in power distribution systems contingency planning in terms of both emergency operations and systems hardening. It is also of critical importance for utility regulatory commissions that tend to set reliability standards based on historical system performances35.

We exploit the simplicity of our framework to demonstrate the uncertainty in long-term service disruptions in the power distribution systems is primarily driven by the uncertainty in projection of frequency of non-intense hurricanes. Our proposed framework can be used by electric utility planners and policymakers to make uncertainty-informed resilient investment decisions. It can also provide insights to climate scientists on the practical implications of uncertainty in climate change projections for power systems management. In particular, the results suggest that efforts that can reduce the uncertainty in predictions of future frequency of hurricanes of all intensities more accurately on the basin scale, or ideally the regional scale, will substantially improve the predictions of hurricane-induced power outage risks under climate change.

We finally note that the study presented here can be extended to account for potential changes in distribution of landfall locations for a more comprehensive analysis of power outage risk under climate change24. Additionally, the statistical relationships in the outage model used here can be coupled with a simulation model to include grid-hardening measures such as undergrounding power lines. By formulating outage models based on alternative grid designs or topologies, our framework would allow for considering technological changes, such as an increased adoption of renewable energy or distributed generation, in evaluating long term power outage risks.

Methods
Baseline scenario: historical data and the simulation framework
The historical data and simulation framework used to generate the baseline scenario in this study are based on the work by Staid et al.47; below we provide a summary, and refer the reader to the original text for details.

Storm seeding
We rely on the historical record of hurricanes making landfall in the continental United States to determine the baseline behavior of hurricanes. Based on storms occurring between 1851 and 2018, we fit a Poisson distribution to annual frequency of storms making landfall and build empirical distributions for the location of landfall and the storm intensity using the HURDAT2 database25,50. For each replicated year, a realization is drawn from the distribution of annual frequency to determine the number of storms occurring. For each simulated storm within a given year, sample realizations are drawn from the distribution of historical landfall locations and distribution of maximum windspeed at landfall. These samples determine where the storm makes landfall and how strong it is when it does.

Storm track model
For each simulated storm, we create a track using a Random Forest model trained on historical storm movement in the same region. For example, for landfall locations in the Gulf of Mexico we rely on historical storms along the Gulf Coast to train the Random Forest model. This ensures that the storm movement follows realistic weather patterns. The track is created concurrently with simulated storm decay. For each six-hour time step following landfall, the maximum wind speed decays according to the model proposed by Kaplan and Demaria18. This proceeds until the maximum wind speed falls below the threshold for tropical storm classification (1-min sustained winds of 34 knots).

Wind field model
With the storm track and forward moving speed fully specified, we then employ a wind field model to calculate the expected distribution of winds for the areas exposed to the storm. To characterize the wind field in this study, we adopt a model proposed by Willoughby et al.58 and use the stormwindmodel R package1 to calculate the storm radius, the maximum 3-s gust wind, and the duration of winds above 20 m/s for the centroid of each census tract within the storm’s radius.

Power outage model
Finally, we use wind parameters calculated via the wind field model as input to a statistical power outage prediction model developed by Guikema et al.13, The model has been trained and validated on historical hurricane-induced power outage events to represent the relationship between wind characteristics and the fraction of customers expected to lose power from a given storm.

Climate-informed projection
To study the impact of climate change on F¯, we introduce three multiplicative factors: the frequency factor, ffre, the frequency factor for very severe storms, fsevfre, and the intensity factor, fint. Specifically, to account for the changes in the frequency of storms, we multiply the mean of the Poisson distribution, that is fitted to the historical data and is used to sample the number of storms in each replicated year, by the frequency factor. Since several studies have suggested that the change in frequency of very intense storms shows a different pattern20, we assign a specific multiplicative factor, fsevfre, to the mean of Poisson distribution for frequency of very intense storms. Lastly, to account for the changes in intensity of storms, we multiply the randomly sampled maximum wind speed for each hurricane by the intensity factor, fint. Note that ffre, fsevfre, and fint are equal to one under baseline scenario and their values under climate change are uncertain. Their uncertainty are evident in Fig. 3, which is reprinted from a synthesis study by knutson et al.20. Considering the heavy tails of distributions for North Atlantic basin, we assign shifted log-normal distributions with the same interquartile ranges depicted in Fig. 3 to represent the variability in ffre, fsevfre and fint. We then sample from these log-normal distributions to draw realizations for the frequency factor, the frequency factor for very severe storms, and the intensity factor for each simulation year under climate change. Note also that we do not consider the impact of climate change on storm sizes in our analysis. We do this given that the storm size is not expected to change significantly with climate change23, in line with recent theoretical advances in our understanding of storm size5.

Polynomial chaos surrogate and sensitivity analysis
To facilitate the uncertainty quantification, we approximate F¯ as series expansions in orthonormal Hermite polynomials (Polynomial Chaos) of ffre, fsevfre, and fint. We use regression to approximate the coefficients of the series expansion and select the polynomial order and number of training samples required for surrogate construction through convergence analysis. Interested readers are referred to11,17,55,59 for more details and theoretical background on Polynomial Chaos surrogates and their computational efficiency as uncertainty quantification engines.

We use one of the most widely used global sensitivity analysis approaches, namely Sobol’ method43,45. In this approach, the variance of system’s response is decomposed to summation of contributions from different inputs to the model and their interaction. The sensitivity of a particular response (say the expected fraction of costumers without power) to different inputs (say the frequency factors) then manifests itself in their associated Sobol’ indices. More specifically, a square-integrable function u(ΞΞ) is expressed as a sum of elementary basis functions15:

u(ΞΞ)=u0+∑j=1duj(Ξj)+∑j<iduij(Ξj,Ξi)+⋯+u12⋯d(ΞΞ),
(1)
where d is the dimensionality of the input, ΞΞ, and u0 is a constant. It was shown by Sobol46 that the above decomposition is unique if the basis functions in the expansion are orthogonal. Accordingly, a functional decomposition of the variance is available9:

Var(u(ΞΞ))=∑j=1dDj+∑j<idDij+⋯+D12⋯d,
(2)
where Di=Var[E(u(ΞΞ)|Ξi)], Dij=Var[E(u(ΞΞ)|Ξi,Ξj)]−Di−Dj and so on for higher order interactions with E the operation of mathematical expectation. Finally, the variance-based sensitivity indices, the so-called Sobol’ indices, read

Si=DiVar(u(ΞΞ)),  Sij=DijVar(u(ΞΞ)), ⋯ .
(3)
It is readily understood that the Sobol’ indices also satisfy

∑j=1dSj+∑j<idSij+⋯+S12⋯d=1.
(4)
The Sobol’ indices, therefore, specify the contribution to the total variance, Var(u(ΞΞ)), from given inputs or input combinations. Monte Carlo sampling based approaches can also be used to evaluate the Sobol’ indices42. However, these approaches can be computationally costly due to the small convergence rate of Monte Carlo sampling particularly in the case of this study when the sought statistic is that of a expected value which itself is based on upwards of tens of hundreds of “simulated years”. Alternatively, Sobol’ indices can be calculated with minimal computational cost when u(ΞΞ) is approximated as series expansion of orthonoromal polynomials. For example, Di in Eq. (3), can be readily calculated as sum of squares of the coefficients associated with the subset of the polynomial basis functions which are functions of Ξi only. Similarly, Var(u(ΞΞ)) can be calculated as summation of squared coefficients of all polynomial basis functions with order equal to or greater than one.

Abstract
Exposure to extreme events is a major concern in coastal regions where growing human populations and stressed natural ecosystems are at significant risk to such phenomena. However, the complex sequence of processes that transform an event from notable to extreme can be challenging to identify and hence, limit forecast abilities. Here, we show an extreme heat content event (i.e., a marine heatwave) in coastal waters of the northern Gulf of Mexico resulted from compounding effects of a tropical storm followed by an atmospheric heatwave. This newly identified process of generating extreme ocean temperatures occurred prior to landfall of Hurricane Michael during October of 2018 and, as critical contributor to storm intensity, likely contributed to the subsequent extreme hurricane. This pattern of compounding processes will also exacerbate other environmental problems in temperature-sensitive ecosystems (e.g., coral bleaching, hypoxia) and is expected to have expanding impacts under global warming predictions.

Introduction
The resiliency of natural and human systems is often tested by extreme events. Such events alone can be devastating and when coupled with existing environmental stresses and/or low frequency trends, they can serve as critical change points1,2. As a result, advancing the understanding of extreme events is fundamental to risk and vulnerability assessments that support management decision making and policy development. This need for improved understanding is becoming especially important in coastal regions where growing human populations, infrastructure, and stressed natural ecosystems present significant exposure to catastrophic impacts from extreme events3,4. A primary extreme event of concern for coastal systems throughout lower and mid-latitude regions is tropical cyclones. There are numerous examples of the devastating impacts these storms have had on coastal communities4, yet advances in intensity forecasts have been limited5. This is particularly problematic for storms making landfall where accurate intensity prediction is critical to human safety5.

Forecasting storm intensity, as with other extreme events, is challenging due to contributions from multiple drivers (e.g., storm track, wind shear, dry air entrainment, and air–sea interaction) with their amplification potential dictated by complex causal chains6. More specifically, the compounding processes that intensify storms and generate extreme conditions in coastal regions may differ from those in the open ocean due to the presence of shallow shelf bathymetry and coastline7,8. These constraints can influence the way sea surface temperature (SST), the critical thermodynamic interface for ocean–storm interaction, evolves and thus modifies storm intensity9. Several studies have shown that the presence of stratification prior to storm arrival can significantly reduce the intensity of impending storms, via ahead-of-eye SST cooling7,8,10,11. Conversely, other studies have suggested or shown that anomalously warm conditions on shelves have contributed to the intensification of hurricanes through landfall6,12,13,14.

While the previous studies showed connections between the shelf thermal structure and coastal storm intensification, the threats associated with the amplification of storms making landfall necessitate a broader understanding of processes by which shelf heat content can be pushed to extreme levels. This critical gap in understanding is in large part due to the lack of observational data during extreme events, which by their definition are rare. Such data could put events in historical context and/or determine the antecedent conditions and process(es) that generate such events4. Despite these challenges, a long-term coastal observing system in the northern Gulf of Mexico provides a unique perspective on shelf thermal conditions before, during, and after Hurricane Michael, an extreme storm event in October 2018. Through the extensive observational records at this mooring site as well as an idealized one-dimensional model, this study demonstrates that the shelf heat content, prior to Hurricane Michael making landfall, was at an extreme state (i.e., experiencing a marine heatwave) set up by a series of compounding atmospheric processes: a shelf mixing event by tropical storm (TS) Gordon followed by an atmospheric heatwave. While this study emphasizes the connection between shelf heat content and storm intensification, compound events that push the shelf to an extreme state (i.e., a full water column marine heatwave) represent a potentially important means by which other temperature-sensitive coastal issues can be amplified into extreme states (e.g., coral bleaching, hypoxia), demonstrating the broad importance of this series of compounding processes.

The development and amplification of hurricanes in the Gulf of Mexico are a common phenomenon during summer and fall seasons (i.e., the Atlantic hurricane season between June 1 and November 30) due to areas of very high heat content derived from the Loop Current and its associated eddies15,16. Thus, the intensification of Hurricane Michael (October 7–10, 2018, Fig. 1) fits a common pattern for this region; however, this event did stand out as an extreme on several metrics17. The strength of the storm alone, reaching a rare category 5 designation, demonstrates the extreme nature of the event. More striking is the setup under which this strengthening occurred as the storm developed late in the Atlantic Hurricane Season and intensified throughout its transit across the continental shelf. Both of these factors are typically associated with weaker or a weakening of storm events18. Furthermore, this storm was particularly hazardous because its intensification was rapid and was consistently underpredicted by forecasts throughout its life17. Consequently, Hurricane Michael, the strongest storm on record to make landfall on the Florida Panhandle, resulted in 16 fatalities and $25 billion in damage in the United States17. Initial investigations of this storm highlight several factors that may have contributed to intensification including favorable atmospheric and oceanic conditions17,19,20,21. However, the amplification through landfall suggests the thermal structure and associated heat content on the shelf in the Mississippi Bight may have played a contributing role to the evolution of this extreme storm event.

Fig. 1: Map of the study region.
figure1
Map of the eastern Gulf of Mexico showing 10-day average OISST anomalies relative to a long-term climatological mean (1981–2019) between September 27 and October 6 with the region between the cyan contour and land showing the primary area that experienced a marine heatwave within that time period. Closed cyan contours outside or inside this area show pockets with or without marine heatwaves, respectively. Also shown are storm tracks for TS Gordon (lighter gray circles) and Hurricane Michael (darker gray circles) with reference dates and storm categories as well as locations of in situ data stations across the Mississippi Bight: site CP (CP, X), DPIA (DI, ★), Orange Beach Buoy (ORB, ▲), and Panama City Beach Fishing Pier (PCB, ■). The gray and black contours are the 20 and 100 m isobaths, respectively.

Full size image
Results
Shelf heat content evolution
The temperature data at site CP provide a unique view of shelf heat content and its potential to have contributed to the intensification of Hurricane Michael (Fig. 2a). Prior to landfall, the thermal conditions on the shelf were exceptionally warm with the depth-average temperatures, a proxy for heat content9, generally above 29 °C during the latter half of September into October. The heat content only dropped by ~0.5 °C over the 3–4 days when Michael transited across the shelf, leaving the conditions well above the 26 °C threshold typically considered conducive for storm intensification9. The pre-storm period is particularly striking when put in context with historical data at site CP. The long-term (2005–2018) mean in late September is around 27 °C (standard deviation of ~1 °C), much closer to the lower temperature limit associated with intensification (~26 °C). By comparison, the 2018 depth-average temperature was well above these conditions (at or above the 90th percentile), making it the warmest year observed in the in situ time series at site CP and exceeding any other year by 0.5–1 °C for this late September/early October time period.

Fig. 2: Time series of observations.
figure2
Time series during the fall of 2018 for a depth-average temperature at site CP (red), a proxy for shelf heat content, b wind speed and direction (coloration) at ORB with 0°/360° being a north wind, c along-shelf depth-average currents at site CP, d across-shelf currents at site CP, e vertical temperature structure at site CP, f air temperature at DI (red), and g SST at PCB (red) and site CP (magenta), with the inverse triangles at the top indicating the landfall times of TS Gordon (9/4/2018) and Hurricane Michael (10/10/2018). Also shown in (a), (f), and (g) are the long-term mean (black line) and the 90th percentile threshold (dotted line) based on 13, 32, and 5–9 years of data, respectively. In (b), the blue (yellow) colors indicate downwelling (upwelling) conditions. In (c) and (d), the thin dashed lines indicate the periods associated with potentially low-quality data due to movement of the AWAC instrument. In (e), the black contours indicate isotherms (26, 28, and 30 °C) and horizontal black line at the bottom indicates the time period of the model simulations (cases A1–A3 in Table 1).

Full size image
To arrive at this high level of thermal energy (i.e., a full water column marine heatwave), the evolution of the depth-average temperature experienced two critical periods of increasing heat content. The first increase from ~26.5 to ~29 °C (August 25–September 2) was driven by a downwelling event caused by southeast winds in late August (Fig. 2b–d), associated with the approach and arrival of TS Gordon. The onshore Ekman transport driven by the easterly component of the southeast winds brought warm surface waters across the shelf which are then forced down at the coast, thereby initiating the warming in the subsurface. The subsequent increase of wind speed enhanced the vertical mixing of the warmer surface and cooler subsurface waters, which further homogenized the temperature in the water column. The event resulted in a dramatic change in the temperature structure with the highly stratified shelf becoming vertically uniform (Fig. 2e). As the storm passed over the region, site CP lost ~0.75 °C in the depth-average temperature consistent with some thermal dynamic heat loss expected from tropical storms, i.e., heat transferred from the ocean to the atmosphere9. Despite the heat loss, the vertical mixing of surface water increased the bottom temperature by ~4 °C relative to pre-storm conditions.

The well-mixed conditions lasted several days, at which point the second warming period began (September 6–22) and was associated with relatively mild wind conditions (wind magnitudes <~5 m s−1) and excessively warm atmospheric conditions (air temperature >~28 °C) (Fig. 2b, f). For context, most of the mid to late September 2018 air temperatures were consistently above the 90th percentile threshold from climatological September air temperatures at marine stations throughout the region (Fig. 2f and Supplementary Fig. 1). This atmospheric heatwave produced a warming event of longer duration (relative to TS Gordon), reheating the upper water column resulting in depth-average temperatures >29 °C and restratifying the thermal structure with the SSTs exceeding 32 °C at times (Fig. 2e, g). Interestingly, there was a mid-water column warming in late September (~28th–29th, Fig. 2e). From the available data it is difficult to determine the cause of this event, however, the warming may have been generated by advection or density compensation. The overall effect of these processes resulted in a water column that maintained extreme heat content well into early October when coastal waters usually begin to experience rapid cooling. Given the thermal conditions at site CP, two natural questions arise in relation to Hurricane Michael. First, is the coupling of events (i.e., a storm mixing event followed by an atmospheric heatwave) critical to the observed excessively high heat content on the shelf in early October? Second, are the conditions at this shelf site (i.e., site CP) representative of the broader Mississippi Bight where Hurricane Michael intensified (Fig. 1)?

Compounding impacts on heat content
To address these questions, a relatively simple one-dimensional (vertical) model, similar to the one in ref. 22, was used to provide a first-order understanding of the processes impacting the thermal structure on the shelf as well as the relative importance of the coupled events. The one-dimensional model simulates the time evolution of the vertical profile of the temperature by applying surface heat fluxes as well as mixing energy determined from bulk formulas for wind and tidal currents at the surface and bottom, respectively. The design of different model runs is summarized in Table 1 with details in the “Methods” section. In short, three simple model scenarios were conducted to determine (1) the best available surface heat flux parameterization; (2) the impact of storm mixing; and (3) the effects of varying shelf depths.

Table 1 Design of model runs.
Full size table
The initial model runs (cases A1–A3 in Table 1) were designed to determine how well a one-dimensional model may capture the main features of the observed thermal structure with three different heat flux parameterization methods (see “Methods” section). For these runs, a subset of the data between August 25 and October 7 (horizontal black line in Fig. 2e) was selected to examine the model performance over the period around the two main events hypothesized to contribute to the late October extreme heat content. The results of cases A1–A3 captured several important aspects of the observed thermal structure (Fig. 3) despite the inherently three-dimensional nature of coastal heat budgets23. All three forcing approaches demonstrated: (1) the complete mixing of the water column by TS Gordon resulting in the warming of the lower portion of the water column, and (2) the post-Gordon thermal re-stratification associated with the reheating of the upper ocean.

Fig. 3: Times series of the model results for cases A1–A3.
figure3
The modeled temperature structure from cases a A1, b A2, and c A3 as well as d the comparison between the observed (Obs) and modeled depth-average temperature, with the filled triangles indicating the landfall time of TS Gordon (9/4/2018). The three model cases differ in the parameterization of the heat flux terms and their use of observed or modeled SST with details provided in the “Methods” section and Table 1. Accounting for the cold bias associated with response to TS Gordon, case A1 in (d) best captured the depth-average temperature response after the impact of TS Gordon with r = 0.89. The case A1 parameterization was used in the subsequent model experiments (cases B’s and C’s in Table 1) with the black vertical dashed line in (a) marking the post TS Gordon period (9/7/2018) when the subsequent model runs began.

Full size image
It is clear that this one-dimensional approach fails to reproduce the initial warming in late August and the timing of the homogenization of the water column associated with TS Gordon (Figs. 2e and 3a). These features in the temperature structure are characteristics of downwelling events24, which highlights the established importance of three-dimensional processes associated with hurricane responses in the coastal ocean7,8. This model limitation imparts a cold bias in temperature outputs at the start of the post TS Gordon period with the depth-average temperatures in the different A cases being between ~1 and 3 °C cooler than the observations (~September 7, Fig. 3d). While case A2 had SST and depth-average temperature closer to the observed conditions, the heat flux parameterizations used in case A1 was selected for the subsequent model experiments for two reasons. First, the latent and sensible heat fluxes in case A2 were derived with the observed SST which represents a dependency on a priori information nudging the model outputs toward the observations that they are being compared to. Furthermore, this same parameterization of the heat flux when using the modeled SST (case A3), i.e., without the observationally derived heat fluxes, did much worse relative to case A1 (Fig. 3c, d). Second and more importantly, of the three modeled cases, case A1 showed the best representation of the observed post-Gordon depth-average temperature variations, after accounting for the cold bias associated with the passage of TS Gordon (Fig. 3d). The relatively high correlation between case A1 and observations (r = 0.89) indicates that the post-storm thermal structure of the water column was primarily a one-dimensional balance driven by surface heat fluxes and vertical mixing. Thus, this simple one-dimensional model (case A1) was used in the subsequent model experiments to further examine the thermal structure with and without compounding processes.

Given the reasonable results produced by the one-dimensional model after TS Gordon, we conducted experiments focused on the specific time period between September 7 and October 7 to assess the impact of the mixing on the evolution of the thermal structure, particularly in terms of the depth-average temperature, prior to the atmospheric heatwave. The first set of numerical experiments (cases B1–B3 in Table 1) were conducted using the thermal structure just prior to TS Gordon (either stratified as observed or artificially mixed: black lines in Fig. 4) as initial conditions and allowing them to evolve based on forcing conditions during the model run. The results were notably different with the stratified water column remaining stratified while the mixed case restratified beginning in early September but remained much more weakly stratified due to the warm thermal conditions at depth (Fig. 5a, b). This difference in stratification had an impact on the uptake/loss of heat across the air–sea interface with the mixed cases (cases B2 and B3) having ~1 °C higher depth-average temperature than the stratified case (Fig. 5c). Given that the observed depth-average temperature was nearly 2 °C above the long-term mean in early October, this ~1 °C increase from the mixing event coupled with a subsequent atmospheric heatwave accounts for nearly 50% of the observed deviation from the long-term mean state (Fig. 2a) and represents a temperature change large enough to significantly impact storm intensity25,26,27. Importantly, removing this added 1 °C effect from the observed depth-average temperature in early October would place the depth-average temperature well below the 90th percentile threshold associated with marine heatwaves (Fig. 2a). Thus, the compounding processes observed in September of 2018, adding 1 °C depth-average temperature to the water column, made what would have been an otherwise above average event into an extreme event (above the 90th percentile threshold, Fig. 2a).

Fig. 4: Initial temperature structure for the different model cases.
figure4
The observed profile (black solid line) and its vertical average (black dashed line) are from site CP at 23:00 on August 25, 2018, and used as the initial thermal structure for the model runs with ‘8/25 condition’ and ‘8/25 condition (mixed)’ in Table 1, respectively (cases A1–A3 and B1–B3). The colored solid and dashed lines indicate the idealized stratified (Cases C1a, C2a, C3a, and C4a) and mixed (Cases C1b, C2b, C3b, and C4b) initial temperature conditions, respectively, for the four additional model scenarios with different depths (Table 1). Note that the vertical dash line indicates the depth-average temperature associated with a given stratified case, projected over the full water column to represent ‘mixed’ temperature structure for that scenario (e.g., Cases C1a and C1b).

Full size image
Fig. 5: Results of model experiments that compare the temperature characteristics of the water column with and without a mixing event.
figure5
The water column temperature structures with the a stratified and b mixed initial conditions, i.e., without and with the storm mixing (cases B1 and B2 in Table 1, respectively); the black contours in (a) and (b) indicate isotherms (26, 28, and 30 °C). c The depth-average temperature from cases B1 (red, stratified), B2 (blue, mixed), and B3 (cyan, mixed with initial heat loss from a storm event); note that the mixed cases (B2 and B3) end nearly 1 °C warmer than the stratified case (B1). d The depth-average temperature difference between the mixed (cases C1b–C4b) and stratified (cases C1a–C4a) model experiments with idealized temperature profiles with water depths of 20 (magenta), 30 (orange), 40 (yellow), and 60 m (gray); see Table 1 for a summary description of different cases and Fig. 4 for the initial temperature profiles used. For all model experiments, the net outward radiation was estimated using the bulk formulations in ref. 22.

Full size image
Additional numerical experiments using idealized thermal profiles more typical of the northern Gulf of Mexico over a range of depths (cases C1–C4 in Table 1 and Fig. 4) indicate a depth-dependent pattern with the relative impact increasing with increasing depth (Fig. 5d). In these model experiments, the focus was on the differences in the evolution of the depth-average temperatures between the initially stratified and mixed conditions at a given water column depth. The idealized 20-m water column (case C1) had less thermal stratification than the observation-based case and hence a smaller difference in the upper ocean temperatures between the mixed and stratified cases (Fig. 4). As a result, the stratified and mixed initial conditions (cases C1a and C1b, respectively) showed very little effect on the overall heat content of the water column, i.e., very little differences in the depth-average temperatures (Fig. 5d). This changed as deeper profiles allowed for larger differences in the upper ocean temperatures between the mixed and stratified cases. In the two deepest cases (i.e., 40 and 60 m), the event coupling provided differences >0.8 °C in the depth-average temperatures between the mixed and stratified cases (Fig. 4d). In addition, these modeling scenarios suggest that the increasing heat content difference with water depth will eventually be mitigated by the depth-average temperature dropping to or below 26 °C (e.g., gray dashed line in Fig. 4), leading to conditions that would not be expected to favor hurricane intensification. While additional observational and modeling work is needed to fully understand relationships between mixing and reheating events on continental shelves, our findings do indicate that changes in depth and hydrographic structure will, not surprisingly, affect the extent to which compounding processes intensify the warming of the water column. Overall, the coupling of a mixing event followed by an atmospheric heatwave does enhance heat content of the water column relative to an atmospheric heatwave without a mixing event.

Potential extent of the compound event
While the model results indicate that the compounding impact of the sequential atmospheric events (i.e., TS Gordon and then the atmospheric heatwave) did contribute to the extreme state of heat content at site CP, its location is notably distant away from the track of Hurricane Michael (Fig. 1). There is some evidence suggesting that the processes observed in the western Mississippi Bight were similar to those in the eastern part of the basin where Hurricane Michael crossed the continental shelf. First, the shelf mixing associated with TS Gordon likely impacted the broader Mississippi Bight region as the structure of the system had a significant wind field. This is supported by satellite data that showed notable decreases in SST (ΔT of 1–2 °C) and increases in sea surface salinity (ΔS of 1.0–1.5), indicative of mixing across the shelf throughout the region (Fig. 6). The response to the atmospheric heatwave was also regional in nature as indicated by the exceptionally warm satellite-derived SST anomalies across the region, consistent with a marine heatwave (Fig. 1). The only in situ data on the shelf in the eastern Mississippi Bight was SST data at site PCB. Similar to site CP, the water temperature was anomalously high relative to historical values, and more importantly the in situ SST data between site CP and PCB for 2018 followed very similar patterns including the warming prior to TS Gordon and the slower, longer duration of warming associated with the regional atmospheric heatwave (Fig. 2g). Thus, the extreme heat content observed at site CP was indicative of a regional marine heatwave in the Mississippi Bight that would have resulted in the intensification of Hurricane Michael.

Fig. 6: Surface temperature and salinity differences.
figure6
Surface ocean property differences in a temperature and b salinity before and after the passage of TS Gordon, with the circles showing the storm track of Gordon as tropical storm (TS) and depression (TD). Dictated by data availability, the temperature difference was determined using the conditions on August 28 and September 7, 2018, and the salinity difference using September 2 and September 9, 2018. The gray and black contours are 20- and 100-m isobaths.

Full size image
Discussion
Regardless of the exact contribution of shelf heat content on the intensification of Hurricane Michael, this study has identified a new pattern of compounding processes that can lead to extreme conditions in coastal oceans (Fig. 7). The observed extreme thermal conditions were set up by an initial mixing event during the passage of TS Gordon and intensified by a subsequent regional atmospheric heatwave. While the downwelling effect associated with TS Gordon was clearly important in influencing the heat content at this specific site, the storm generated mixing that impacted the broader shelf region (Fig. 6) and proved critical in two ways. First, the direct mixing of shelf water resulted in a vertical redistribution of the thermal properties, transferring the upper ocean heat down to deeper portions of the water column (Fig. 7b), which effectively removed all the cooler bottom water from the shelf.

Fig. 7: Conceptual diagram of the compound event.
figure7
Conceptual diagram of the compound event that resulted in extreme shelf heat content including the a initial stratified shelf, b mixing event response, and c atmospheric heatwave response, showing the water column temperature profile (black thick line), the water column heat content (Hc: thick black bar on the bottom), the incoming solar radiance (QI: yellow arrow), and the net heat loss (Qo: red arrow). The dashed black line in (b) and (c) indicates the temperature structure from a previous phase of the sequence of events. The magenta dashed line in (c) indicates changing upper-layer stratification during the atmospheric heatwave. The changing arrows for Qo reflect the dependence of this term on SST.

Full size image
Second, the reorganization of the thermal structure created a water column better able to absorb subsequent heat input, thus allowing a rapid re-warming of the upper ocean (Fig. 7c). This was caused by the reduced SST post-mixing event which lowered the effectiveness of the primary heat loss terms (i.e., sensible and latent heat fluxes). The reheating of the upper ocean was further facilitated by initially weak stratification levels due to storm mixing which were conducive to a rapid redistribution of incoming solar radiation to deeper waters. Since solar insolation is primarily absorbed by the very near surface of the water column, low levels of stratification would allow this incoming heat to be more easily mixed to depth, limiting the rate of temperature increase at the sea surface and thus slowing the heat loss out of the upper ocean. Consequently, the compounding impacts of a mixing event followed by an atmospheric heatwave resulted in the highest late September/early October heat content on the shelf in the Mississippi Bight over a 13-year record.

An unclear aspect of the newly identified sequence of events is the duration of the bottom warming associated with the downward transfer of heat after a mixing event (Fig. 7b). This question directly relates to the residence time of bottom waters which, being dependent on shelf geometry and circulation, is likely to be highly variable among different shelf regions. The Mississippi Bight is generally a wide (~200 km) and gently sloping (depth to width ratio of ~0.001) shelf (with the exception of the centrally located Desoto Canyon region), which would favor long residence times. Furthermore, current velocity data from site CP after TS Gordon showed a series of upwelling and downwelling events producing limited net transport between September 7 and October 7 with a depth-average mean of ~3.3 cm s−1 which translates to a transport length scale of ~85 km. While this information is from only a single location, it suggests the broader regional circulation was likely weak, favoring a longer retention of the warm bottom water.

The importance of heat content and thermal structure on hurricane intensity is well-established and much of the recent work on continental shelves has focused on intensity reduction through stratification breakdown and the resulting injection of colder bottom water into the upper water column as storms pass over these regions. Our findings highlight that this same de-stratification process, given the right conditions, can be a precursor for extreme heat content, and hence intensification of subsequent storms. The shelf-wide extent of the processes observed at the mooring site was consistent with the regional marine heatwave occurring across the Mississippi Bight and would have contributed to the observed intensification of Hurricane Michael as it transited the continental shelf. With near-real-time availability of many coastal in situ and satellite observations and an understanding of this type of compound event, prediction of potential storm intensification of landfall events could be enhanced. Thus, this study reinforces the urgent need to better represent coastal hydrographic conditions in hurricane prediction efforts.

Unfortunately, the understanding of extreme events is complicated by climate change, and current long-term climatic trends suggest a growing positive feedback between the processes involved in this compound event that could expand the impact of such extreme conditions. For example, tropical storms are expected to increase in strength and there is some evidence of a poleward expansion of their activity28. In addition, there is abundant evidence that terrestrial heatwaves will increase in frequency, duration, and intensity29. As a result of these shifts in the event characteristics, mixing events are likely to impact wider swaths of shelf areas and the subsequent reheating is likely to be more intense. Thus, the cumulative effect should amplify the impacts of this compound event pattern on shelf heat content under the current forecasts for a warmer climate.

While the statistical likelihood of this compound event is unclear now as well as in the future, the importance of understanding extreme conditions lies in their disproportionately large impact on human and natural systems. As suggested by this study, extreme hurricanes, being linked to SST, are clearly one class of coastal hazard that will be influenced by such extreme heat content. However, this compounding amplification of heat content may be devastating to ecosystems as well, which are typically of significant societal and economic value. For example, temperature-sensitive benthic communities and habitats (e.g., coral reefs and hypoxia-prone shelves) already stressed by long-term warming trends and terrestrial inputs may be pushed beyond their resilience capacity by such extreme heat events4,30. While the effects of marine heatwaves on ecosystems have been demonstrated31,32, the impacts of the observed extreme heat content events are difficult to quantify using conventional SST-based identification algorithms because of the significance of the water column temperature structure at depth. As such, this sequence of compounding processes and the resulting extreme conditions represent a ‘black swan’ event that a range of coastal interests should be considering in management and disaster response decisions.

Methods
In situ data and associated analysis
To understand the atmospheric and oceanic conditions on the shelf before, during, and after Hurricane Michael, field and reanalysis data from various sources were used. Standard meteorological data, including air temperature, relative humidity/dew point temperature, and wind speed and direction from two NOAA National Data Buoy Center (NDBC) stations were used: 42012 offshore of Orange Beach, AL (ORB) and DPIA1 on Dauphin Island (DI) (Fig. 1). These stations were the closest measurements available to the main mooring site (CP), and both were typically similar in nature and have relatively long records (10 and 32 years at ORB and DI, respectively). Other key atmospheric variables, including incoming solar radiation and outgoing long-wave radiation, were obtained from the National Centers for Environmental Prediction (NCEP) North American Region Reanalysis (NARR) for the grid cell closet to site CP (https://www.esrl.noaa.gov/psd/data/gridded/data.narr.html). The NARR outputs are on 1/3° grid (~32-km resolution) and were interpolated from the 3-h outputs to hourly to match the NDBC data.

The hydrographic data were primarily derived from a long-term mooring station (site CP) on the 20 m isobath to the west-southwest of Mobile Bay (Fig. 1). The site provides a relatively long-term (13 years in 2005–2018) perspective of shelf thermal structure from a suite of instruments throughout the water column. The instrument suite has changed over time, but typically consists of bottom (~0.4 m above bottom, mab) and near-surface (~15.5 mab) CTD instruments, and 4–9 thermistors. Details of the mooring configurations and aspects of the processing can be found in various studies33,34. Importantly, the summer of 2018 featured an additional data stream from a CTD on a surface buoy (~100 m apart from site CP), providing data at ~19.5 mab (i.e., ~0.5 m below the surface). In order to provide a similar in situ SST measured in previous years, SST data from ORB (~1 m below the surface) were combined with those from site CP for available data (9 years in 2009–2017). These data are available at the NOAA NCEI (https://accession.nodc.noaa.gov/0203749) and Dauphin Island Sea Lab Alabama Real-time Coastal Observing System (https://arcos.disl.org/). Additional time series data for surface conditions were obtained from NOAA NDBC station PCBF1 (2005–2018) on the Panama City Beach Fishing Pier (PCB, Fig. 1), closer to the landfall location of Hurricane Michael. A few relatively minor gaps were present in some of the time series data which were filled using either linear interpolation or through substitution of data from a nearby station. The resulting time series were used to determine ensemble properties (i.e., means, standard deviations, and maximum values) for the long-term records. One exception was PCB, which had significant gaps in the times series and resulted in ensemble properties determined using 5–9 years of data as availability allowed. These ensemble properties for in situ SST and air temperature were consistent with an overlapping 11-year time series from an inshore station in St. Andrews Bay (2008–2018), ~20 km east-southeast of PCB.

The heat content/flux calculations were carried out following typical procedures. For heat content, the depth-average temperature was used given the shelf focus of the study9,12,13 and was calculated with water column temperature observations interpolated to a 1-m grid. While surface temperature is the means though which tropical cyclones interact with the ocean, this study focuses on depth-average temperature as averaging over the expected mixing depth of a storm has been suggested or shown be to the most relevant property for storm intensification35,36,37, particularly over a shallow shelf9,12. The sensible and latent heat fluxes were calculated with the TOGA-COARE algorithms35 similar to other studies in the region34. Conversion between relative humidity and dew point temperature was conducted following the standard algorithms (https://bmcnoldy.rsmas.miami.edu/Humidity.html)38,39,40. Extreme thermal events in the ocean and atmosphere were determined following the methods in ref. 41. In short, a marine heatwave is determined to be temperatures exceeding the 90th percentile for five or more days while an atmospheric heatwave required two or more days. As in ref. 41, the climatological means and 90th percentiles for the time series data were produced at each time step (hourly for site CP) which follows the recommendation in ref. 41 to use the longest, highest resolution data available.

Current velocity data throughout the water column were obtained from a Nortek Acoustic Doppler Waves And Current profiler (AWAC) at site CP. The data were processed following the procedure in ref. 42, where a 40-h low-pass Lanczos filter was used to highlight synoptic scale circulation patterns. Note that the periods around the storm events have potentially lower quality data due to movement of the instrument but the data appear to be physically consistent with the wind forcing. As such, the data were shown, but are indicated as questionable (Fig. 2c, d). These data are available at the Dauphin Island Sea Lab Data Management Center (https://www.disl.org/research/data-management-center) and NOAA NCEI (https://accession.nodc.noaa.gov/0211052).

Satellite data and associated analysis
For determining the regional sea surface conditions and delineating the potential spatial scale of the impacts of TS Gordon on the shelf, several satellite-based data sets were used. SST data were obtained from the Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL) Multi-scale Ultra-high Resolution (MUR) SST product (https://podaac.jpl.nasa.gov/Multi-scale_Ultra-high_Resolution_MUR-SST) which is available from 2003 to the present. This is a 1-km resolution product that blends 1-km infrared sensor data and 25-km microwave sensor data. While this SST data set is relatively short in duration compared to other SST products, its high resolution is ideal for the coastal environment, the focus of this study. In addition, we used the recently released NOAA Optimum Interpolated SST (OISST) version 2.1 (https://www.ncdc.noaa.gov/oisst) for 1982–2019. Similar to MUR, this product blends infrared and microwave data, but also includes ship, buoy, and Argo float observations. While courser in resolution (0.25°), this data set is much longer than the MUR SST and has been commonly used in heatwave studies41, making this work readily comparable to recent marine heatwave studies.

As with the mooring data, the methods of ref. 41 were followed to identify locations that experienced a marine heatwave within the 10-day period (September 27–October 6) prior to the arrival of Hurricane Michael in the Gulf of Mexico and identified as a full water column marine heatwave in the mooring data. The time period covers the dates when the depth-average temperature at site CP was consistently above the 90th percentile value until 3 days prior to the landfall of Hurricane Michael. The averaging period was ended 3 days prior to landfall to avoid including any storm impacts, which is similar to the way (see ref. 43) in which a pre-storm SST value was obtained . While the MUR SST did appear to be generally consistent with the OISST data, the OISST data were used in the spatial analysis of the marine heatwave for the reasons mentioned above, i.e., duration and consistency with previous studies31,44,45,46.

In addition, sea surface salinity (SSS) data were obtained from the NASA Soil Moisture Active Passive (SMAP) mission (https://podaac.jpl.nasa.gov/SMAP). The JPL SMAP SSS L3 product was used (8-day composite on a 1/4° grid, i.e., ~25-km resolution). As a result of this coarse spatial resolution, pixels by the coast are frequently contaminated by land and are excluded from the analysis. Note that salinity values presented are based on the practical salinity scale.

Modeling setup and scenarios
A simple one-dimensional (vertical) model, similar to the one in ref. 22, was used to explore the primary processes impacting the thermal structure of the water column at site CP. The model requires surface heat flux and mixing energy to simulate the evolving hydrographic structure of the water column. The mixing energies at the surface and bottom boundaries were determined using bulk formulas as functions of wind speed and tidal current, respectively22. The wind energy for mixing was determined from wind data at ORB, the closest oceanic wind measurement source to site CP. Since the Mississippi Bight is a microtidal environment, the tidal mixing was determined using a small fixed current value (12 cm s−1). NARR outputs were used for solar radiation and other heat fluxes were estimated using two approaches: (1) NARR outputs for back radiation and sensible and latent heat estimated using the TOGA-COARE algorithms in ref. 35 and (2) net outward radiation estimated using the bulk formulations in ref. 22.

The first set of model runs (cases A1–A3 in Table 1) were conducted to determine how well a one-dimensional model may capture the main features of the observed thermal structure in response to the different heat fluxes parameterizations. A subset of the data (August 25–October 7) was selected to examine the period around the two main events hypothesized to contribute to the late October extreme heat content. After October 7, there was no longer surface data available at site CP. While this was still three days before landfall of Hurricane Michael, the applicability of the one-dimensional model is expected to breakdown as three-dimensional ocean processes became increasingly important on the shelf as Hurricane Michael approached. As such, October 7 served as a natural end point of the model simulations. The model runs were initialized with the observed temperature and salinity profile data (interpolated to a 1-m grid) on August 25. Salinity plays a significant role for the stratification at site CP47, but the salinity data were very limited (only three vertical depths). With linearly interpolated salinity specified at each time step, only the temperature structure evolution was modeled. The model was run for three cases: net outward radiation estimated using the bulk formulations in ref. 22 (case A1), and sensible and latent heat estimated using the TOGA-COARE algorithms in ref. 35 forced with observed (case A2) or modeled (case A3) SST. From the comparison between the modeled thermal structure and depth-average temperature time series to data (see the “Results” section), the heat flux parameterization in case A1 was selected as most appropriate and used for the subsequent model experiments.

A second set of model experiments (cases B1–B3 in Table 1) were designed to examine the compounding impacts of the storm mixing event and atmospheric heatwave. To exclude the three-dimensional nature of storm impacts by TS Gordon, this set of experiments was conducted from September 7 (after landfall of TS Gordon on September 4) until October 7. However, the initial conditions were based on the observed stratified temperature and salinity profiles on August 25 prior to TS Gordon so the evolution of the thermal structure of the water column just prior to TS Gordon could be evaluated with and without the impacts of a mixing event. As such, three scenarios were tested, differing only in the structure of the initial conditions. In case B1 the observed thermal (black solid line in Fig. 4) and salinity profiles were used as initial conditions. Because the temperature structure on August 25 had a very distinct bottom mixed layer (15–20-m depth, defined using a temperature change threshold of ΔT < 0.01 °C), the salinity profile was constructed to have uniform salinity at this depth interval based on the bottom measurement and through linear interpolation for the remainder of the water column. In case B2, the depth-average of the interpolated temperature (black dashed line in Fig. 4) and salinity were used as initial conditions to generate a uniform water column (i.e., mixed initial profile). Note that case B2 does not include the full effects of storm mixing and the initial total heat content in the water column was the same between cases B1 and B2. As such, another experiment (case B3) was conducted with the same conditions as case B2 except with a generic storm heat loss based on an open ocean category 3 storm following ref. 9, so the initial uniform temperature profile was cooler than that in case B2 by 0.6 °C. In all three cases, the salinity evolved as determined by the vertical mixing in the model, however, this was only relevant to case B1 since cases B2 and B3 were initialized with uniform depth-average profiles (i.e., fully mixed).

Another eight numerical experiments (cases C’s in Table 1) were conducted to examine the depth dependency of the compounding impacts using the idealized initial water column thermal profiles based on more general conditions, roughly guided by the conditions in the northern Gulf of Mexico9. These eight cases consisted of paired runs for four different water depths (20, 30, 40, and 60 m) with and without initial thermal stratification at the onset of the model run. In the stratified cases (cases C1a–C4a), the thermal profiles consisted of a 6-m surface mixed layer and a bottom boundary layer over the bottom 25% of the water column, separated by a thermocline with a temperature change of 0.3 °C m−1 (solid profiles in Fig. 4). This thermocline value represents an intermediate rate of change on the shelf in the eastern Gulf of Mexico: ~0.6 °C m−1 at site CP and ~0.1 °C m−1 for the west Florida shelf9. In the mixed cases (cases C1b–4b), the profiles associated with the stratified cases were depth-averaged to produce a uniform initial thermal structure (dashed profiles in Fig. 4). These eight idealized experiments used a uniform salinity profile to avoid additional complications from salinity stratification. All the C cases were run in a similar manner to the B cases beginning just after TS Gordon (September 7) and ending just before Hurricane Michael (October 7). For these depth paired model runs (e.g., cases C1a and C1b), the difference in the depth-average temperature was determined over the model period to assess the potential impact of a mixing event over the study period for different water depths. An additional four cases with a generic storm heat loss (similar to case B3) were conducted and compared to cases C1b–C4b, but the resulting depth-average temperatures were generally similar, only slightly lower and thus were omitted for brevity.

Abstract
Extreme weather events (e.g., cyclones, floods, droughts) are capable of changing ecosystems and altering how animals obtain resources. Understanding the behavioural responses of animals being impacted by these natural events can help initiate and ameliorate conservation or management programs. This study investigated short- and long-term space-use of the critically endangered hawksbill sea turtle (Eretmochelys imbricata), as well as five species of fishes and stingrays, in response to two of the most destructive Caribbean hurricanes in known history – Irma and Maria, which were at their peak intensity when they passed the US Virgin Islands in September of 2017. Using passive acoustic telemetry in St. Thomas, US Virgin Islands, we show a variety of short-term behavioural patterns initiated across species to reduce exposure to the strong environmental conditions, such as moving to deeper habitats within the study area. Although short-term expansion of activity space was evident for several sea turtles, long-term impacts on space-use and body condition were limited. In contrast, southern stingrays (Hypanus americanus) left the study area shortly after the hurricanes, suggesting vulnerability stemming from altered habitat, prey availability, or temperature/oxygen profiles. This study shows the strong spatial resilience of several nearshore species despite exposure to two consecutive category 5 hurricanes.

Introduction
Extreme weather events have the capacity to severely damage or disrupt ecosystems across a gradient of spatial and temporal scales1. Immediate impacts may cause mortality or displacement, and readily affect an animal’s access to fixed resources such as food and shelter2,3. Similarly, physical alteration of habitat (e.g., temperature, nest sites, visibility, migration routes, etc.) can lead to suboptimal physiological conditions4,5. If deleterious conditions persist or respite from the disturbance is not attained, impacts may become more critical affecting survival through metabolic/nutritional deficiencies, disease, or phenotypic/genotypic selective pressures, among others6,7,8. Overall, these consequences can alter population or community dynamics causing multiplicative effects throughout the ecosystem9. For example, the co-existence of certain species and differences in species diversity are strongly driven by mechanistic drivers relating to moderate or patchy disturbances (intermediate disturbance hypothesis10,11). For highly mobile species, emigration or escape from the disturbed area, either before, during, or after, may increase chances of survival12,13, whereas individuals with limited escape ability may have to rely on other adaptations14,15. Resilience to environmental disturbance is a key ecological concept driving the survival of individuals/species as these events have increasingly become more intense, especially in the Western Atlantic Ocean and Caribbean16. Indeed, natural and human-induced disturbances augmented by climate change are affecting organisms in aquatic and terrestrial ecosystems worldwide at an alarming rate17,18,19. Species that lack specific adaptations to escape or endure drastic changes in environmental conditions, as well as those with specialized resource needs or that face extinction/extirpation are particularly at risk posing specific conservation concerns20,21. Further, predicting how animals will respond to or are affected by extreme weather provides relevant context for disaster planning and the ecological impacts that ensue. This is especially applicable for management in areas that rely directly on access to natural resources for social or economic subsistence22,23 (e.g., tourism, fishing, and agriculture).

In September 2017, two category 5 hurricanes – Irma and Maria – made destructive landfall across the eastern Caribbean (Fig. 1). At its peak, Hurricane Irma produced winds as strong as 155 kts (~287 km h−1)24 and has been regarded as one of the most powerful storms in the Caribbean in known history. The hurricanes hit St. Thomas, US Virgin Islands (18.33°N, 64.97°W) – a small island (~50 km2) and popular vacation destination – on September 6th (Irma) and September 20th (Maria) causing widespread damage. Hurricane Irma was at its peak strength (atmospheric pressure: ~91.5 kPa) when the center of the eye passed 30 km north of St. Thomas with the southern eye-wall passing along the island’s northern coast. Hurricane Maria (~91.3 kPa, 259 km h−1) was also near its peak when it passed 70 km south of St. Thomas25.

Figure 1
figure1
Approximate track of Hurricanes Irma and Maria during September 2017 including the location of St. Thomas, US Virgin Islands. This map (with self-created symbols/shapes/text) was created using ESRI (Environmental Systems Resource Institute; http://www.esri.com/software/arcgis) ArcMap software, version 10.6. Basemap sources include: Esri, GEBCO, NOAA, Garmin, HERE, and other contributors.

Full size image
Due to the unpredictable and destructive nature of hurricanes/cyclones, few studies exist tracking the movements of marine species at extensive temporal scales relevant to these events. Additionally, most reports lack the spatial resolution needed to track marine animals consistently before and after disturbances. In this paper we describe the results of an acoustic telemetry study, located in Brewers Bay, St. Thomas (Fig. 2), that provided a unique opportunity to analyze the movements of a diversity of marine species before, during, and after these hurricanes, offering unique insight on the behavioural responses to extreme weather events. We investigated the spatial patterns of juvenile sea turtles, stingrays, and tarpon, as well as three species of snappers across varying temporal scales in response to two consecutive extreme environmental events – Hurricanes Irma and Maria. Emphasis was placed on comparing regular weekly spatial patterns of individuals across detection periods relative to behavior immediately following Irma – the more severe and destructive hurricane. Several spatial metrics were used to identify the size and locations of space used throughout the period individuals were tracked. We predicted that the short-term (≤week) impacts of Hurricane Irma would cause shifts in regular spatial patterns, particularly in shallower waters where habitat disturbance would presumably be greatest. Long-term impacts were expected to be minimal except for those individuals that were driven outside Brewers Bay due to the hurricanes to find more suitable habitat.

Figure 2
figure2
Brewers Bay receiver array (18.3425°N, 64.9800°W) located in the US Virgin Islands (see map inset) with four habitat categories identified. Only receivers that were present prior to and after Hurricane Irma are included (34 receivers). The habitat categories were broadly categorized into four groups: shallow (<10 m), deep (>10 m), Black Point (the northern point within Brewers Bay), and runway (the southern part of Brewers Bay). This map (with self-created symbols/shapes/text) was created using ESRI (Environmental Systems Resource Institute; http://www.esri.com/software/arcgis) ArcMap software, version 10.6. Basemap sources include: SIO, NOAA, US Navy, NGA, GEBCO, and Google Earth.

Full size image
Results
Hawksbill turtles
A total of 11 hawksbill turtles had active transmitters attached when Hurricane Irma made landfall at Brewers Bay. Detections after June 2018 were removed from one turtle (1264) after it was identified to have dropped its tag. The total number of weeks turtles were tagged ranged between 29 and 140 weeks (Table 1), although some individuals were still being detected after October 2018. Most individuals had high weekly residency indices (i.e., 7/11 had mean values > 0.75), and there was no significant decrease in residency in Brewers Bay after Hurricane Irma both short-term (1–2 weeks) and long-term (>15 weeks; Fig. S1). Water temperature (~1 °C) and DO (~1–2 mg L−1) decreased abruptly during Hurricanes Irma and Maria (Figs 3; S2). The mean weekly space-use area estimates, 50% and 95% AKDEs, were ~0.046 km2 and 0.213 km2, respectively (Table 1). Standardized space-use sizes across individuals were relatively consistent throughout the detection period (Fig. 4), however, based on presence of outliers it was evident that several turtles (i.e., 1261, 1262, 1263) occupied larger core-use (50% AKDEs) and extent areas (95% AKDEs) during the week after Hurricane Irma, as well as the week prior to Hurricane Irma (50% AKDEs: 1259, 1264, 15785) compared to most other weeks. Similarly, outliers associated with reduced weekly space-use overlap were present during the week following Hurricane Irma for five of the 11 individuals (50% AKDE: 1261, 1263, 15785; 95% AKDE: 1261, 1262, 1263, 12499, 15785; Fig. 5). For some individuals the increase in space-use and decrease in weekly overlap after Hurricane Irma co-occurred with an increase in new space-use relative to past weeks tagged (i.e., cumulative overlap). For example, individuals 1261, 1262, and 1263 all used different areas immediately after Hurricane Irma compared to the cumulative area used five (or six) weeks prior (Fig. 6). This pattern was further demonstrated by the PCA that included the three spatial metrics and showed relatively large space-use area and new space-use area (and low space-use overlap) after Hurricane Irma for individuals 1257, 1261, 1262, and 1263 (Fig. S3). Three of these individuals (1257, 1261, 1262) were also mainly detected in the northern part of Brewers Bay (Fig. S3a), and two (1261, 1262) belonged to the smallest size class (<40 cm CL; Fig. S3b). Space-use metrics of the largest turtles (>50 cm CL) appeared to be less influenced by Hurricane Irma (Fig. S3b). The comparison of standardized cumulative overlap between individuals tagged in 2016 and 2017 demonstrated that home range size (or the maximum area used based on receiver coverage in Brewers Bay) was reached >15 weeks after tagging (i.e., when standardized cumulative overlap approached an asymptote; Fig. S4). Cumulative overlap of space-use extent (95% AKDE) increased at a greater rate in the turtles tagged in 2017 compared to 2016, whereas core space-use was similar between years (Fig. S4).

Table 1 Summary of sea turtles, fishes, and sting rays with active transmitters during Hurricane Irma.
Full size table
Figure 3
figure3
Mean daily values of environmental parameters including wind speed (a) and air pressure (b) taken from weather stations in St. John, USVI and Vieques, Puerto Rico, as well as water temperature (c; n = 12 loggers) and dissolved oxygen (d; n = 2 loggers) in the study site (Brewers Bay) during the month prior to and after Hurricane Irma. The vertical dashed lines correspond to Hurricanes Irma (Sep 6, 12:00 local time) and Maria (Sep 20, 02:00 local time), respectively.

Full size image
Figure 4
figure4
Mean 50% (a) and 95% (b) weekly auto-correlated kernel density estimates (AKDEs) of juvenile hawksbill turtles. The left-sided and right-sided red dotted vertical lines correspond to Hurricanes Irma and Maria, respectively. The grey shaded area represents the standard error of the mean. Weekly sample sizes (i.e., number of individuals) are indicated at top of plot. Only a subset of data (i.e., week −5 to 41 relative to Hurricane Irma) is plotted for clarity, and the total number of outliers throughout each individual’s detection period is summarized within the legend in parentheses. If no outlier occurred during the subset period an ‘x’ is marked in the legend for that individual. Outlier values do not exceed 100% but may appear so because overlapping points were scattered vertically (<4%) for clarity.

Full size image
Figure 5
figure5
Mean 50% (a) and 95% (b) consecutive weekly AKDE overlap of juvenile hawksbill turtles. The left-sided and right-sided red dotted vertical lines correspond to Hurricanes Irma and Maria, respectively. The grey shaded area represents the standard error of the mean. Weekly sample sizes (i.e., number of individuals) are indicated at top of plot. Only a subset of data (i.e., week −5 to 41 relative to Hurricane Irma) is plotted for clarity, and the total number of outliers throughout each individual’s detection period is summarized within the legend in parentheses. If no outlier occurred during the subset period an ‘x’ is marked in the legend for that individual.

Full size image
Figure 6
figure6
Cumulative weekly space-use plots of 50% and 95% AKDEs for juvenile hawksbill turtles including space-use one week prior to and after Hurricane Irma, as well as AKDEs from all weeks prior to Hurricane Irma combined. Each individual is identified at the top of each sub-plot; the numbers in parentheses represent the number of weeks prior to Hurricane Irma that individual had been tagged for. An arrow pointed down (and p-value next to it) refers to an increased use of deeper waters during the week after Irma (compared to the week before). An arrow pointed down indicates shallower waters were used following Irma.

Full size image
Investigation of movements immediately before, during, and after Hurricane Irma, showed a variety of patterns (Fig. S5). Turtles detected in the south (i.e., adjacent to the runway), remained localized to that area, whereas individuals further north were typically more mobile at these short-term periods. These patterns were also clear when depth-use was explored (Fig. 7a). Furthermore, there was an overwhelming trend of juvenile hawksbill turtles swimming deeper during both Hurricane Irma and Maria (e.g., 9/10 individuals tagged with depth sensors showed this behaviour; Fig. 7a,b). These vertical movements were often associated with horizontal movements or habitat shifts to access deeper waters. For example, turtles 1261 and 1262 left the shallow water area during the hurricanes (Fig. 7a). Alternatively, turtles 1258, 1260, and 15785 remained near the airport runway and increasingly used deeper water available there during the week after Irma (Figs 6 and 7a). Short-term (i.e., 32 hours) depth-use was significantly associated with the correlated parameters wind speed, atmospheric pressure, and water temperature during both hurricanes based on linear regressions (p < 0.05). Finally, there was no indication of significant decrease in body condition index for turtles that were recaptured in Brewers Bay up to a year after Hurricanes Irma and Maria (paired t-test, df = 6, p = 0.435).

Figure 7
figure7
Mean 30-min centres of activity (COAs) depth-use for each individual juvenile hawksbill turtle (a) and mean daily depths for all individuals combined (b) during September 2017. Each coloured point/line corresponds to a specific area within Brewers Bay. The vertical dashed lines correspond to Hurricanes Irma (a: Sep 6, 12:00 local time; b: Sep 6) and Maria (a: Sep 20, 02:00 local time; b: Sep 20), respectively.

Full size image
Fishes and rays
Six fish and four rays were tagged 44 to 75 weeks before Hurricane Irma hit Brewers Bay and were detected between 53 and 122 weeks total (Table 1). Residency varied among individuals with the mean number of weekly 30-min position estimates ranging from 185 (55%; mangrove snapper) to 331 (99%; mutton snapper) (Table 1). All individuals were detected >14 weeks after Hurricane Irma, except two southern stingray which were not detected in Brewers Bay more than four weeks after the first hurricane (Table 1). Furthermore, one of these southern stingrays was not detected following Hurricane Maria.

For fish and rays, when weekly spatial metrics (i.e., space-use size; space-use overlap, new weekly space-use) were ranked, the values during the week following Hurricane Irma were often relatively high (or low) compared to estimates outside this period (Fig. 8). Specifically, space-use size during the week following Hurricane Irma for all the tagged southern stingrays, mutton snapper, mangrove snapper, and tarpon were in the upper 85th percentile for both 50% and 95% AKDEs compared to all other weeks detected (Fig. 8a). Similarly, they were also in the lower 90th percentile for space-use overlap after Hurricane Irma compared to all other weeks (Fig. 8b). Ranked new space-use resulted in more variability among some individuals; for example, the mangrove snapper did not utilize new space immediately after hurricane Irma compared to southern stingrays, mutton snapper, and tarpon (particularly for 50% AKDEs; Figs 8c and 9). The new space exploited by southern stingrays during the week after Hurricane Irma differed among individuals but expanded outward, particularly to the north for the individuals (e.g., 45324, 45331) that had the largest area used (Fig. 9). The two lane snappers showed variable ranking for all three metrics (Fig. 8), as well as differences in activity space (50% AKDE) bottom-depth before and after Irma (Fig. 9); individual 45286 was unusual because it shifted its activity space to a completely new habitat in deeper water adjacent to the airport runway after Hurricane Irma (Fig. 9). A PCA was not possible among spatial metrics due to lack of discrimination among variables/individuals.

Figure 8
figure8
Spatial metrics (a: space-use size; b: space-use overlap, c: new weekly space-use) of stingrays and fishes during the week after Hurricane Irma (‘week 1’) estimated as a proportional rank (%) relative to the size of values in all other weeks (i.e., before and after Hurricane Irma). Each square/circle represents an individual. Note the y-axis scales vary.

Full size image
Figure 9
figure9
Cumulative weekly space-use plots of 50% and 95% AKDEs for fish and rays including space-use one week prior to and after Hurricane Irma, as well as AKDEs from all weeks prior to Hurricane Irma combined. Each individual is identified at the top of each sub-plot; the numbers in parentheses represent the number of weeks prior to Hurricane Irma that individual had been tagged for. An arrow pointed down (and p-value next to it) refers to an increased use of deeper waters during the week after Irma (compared to the week before). An arrow pointed down indicates shallower waters were used following Irma.

Full size image
Distinct short-term movement patterns were apparent for at least six of nine individuals. For example, three of the four rays and some fishes (e.g., lane snapper - 45291, tarpon, mangrove snapper) moved westward toward deeper water areas in Brewers Bay during Hurricane Irma (Fig. S6). One ray (24799) moved to the southwest during the hurricane to deeper water along the airport runway (Fig. S6). No discernible depth pattern was observed from the pressure sensor in the tarpon (the only fish with this sensor incorporated), although it was detected more readily in the Black Point area to the north immediately after Irma (Fig. S7) using shallower waters (e.g., 50% AKDE, Fig. 9).

Discussion
Two of the largest hurricanes in recorded history devastated St Thomas, USVI (United States – Virgin Islands) and nearby islands less than two weeks apart in September 2017. Brewers Bay was hit with powerful winds (~287 km h−1), large waves and storm surges several feet above sea level. It resulted in the destruction of surrounding university and airport buildings on-land, and significantly disturbed habitats in-water (e.g., seagrass beds were decimated, coastal areas eroded, and siltation increased during/after each hurricane; JKM pers. obs.), the long-term effects not yet known. Every hawksbill turtle remained in Brewers Bay for at least six months to over a year after these hurricanes and demonstrated specific adaptive behaviours in response to these disturbances such as short-term expansions of activity space and deep movements. Similarly, most fishes continued to utilize Brewers Bay at least several months after the hurricanes despite changes in behaviour immediately following Irma. However, it was evident that southern stingrays were significantly impacted (e.g., by food/habitat availability or physiological constraints), and three of four tagged individuals left Brewers Bay after the hurricanes (between 2–14 weeks after Irma). Generally, Hurricane Irma caused stronger responses in animal behaviour compared to Hurricane Maria – a slightly less severe storm whose path (and resulting storm surge) was further from our study site.

Hawksbill turtles
As juveniles, hawksbills commonly inhabit shallow bays, mainly for protection and physiological benefits26,27 (e.g., access to food). Given the high residency in Brewers Bay before and after Hurricane Irma, there appears to be adequate resources despite the disturbances. This is supported by similar body conditions among recaptured individuals following the hurricanes. Juvenile hawksbills consume a variety of prey including algae, marine plants, sponges and other invertebrates28, which may make them more resilient to disturbance compared to other turtle species. For example, green sea turtles (Chelonia mydas) were not observed in Brewers Bay for several weeks after Irma removed most of the shallow seagrass beds – their primary food source29. A major research priority is to better understand juvenile sea turtle foraging grounds, as well as the impact of environmental disturbances on habitat30; this study highlights that the critically endangered juvenile hawksbill is highly dependent on a small area long-term to obtain necessary resources even after a major disturbance.

Outliers from the three weekly metrics (activity space size, overlap, and cumulative/new) used to explore spatial changes relative to the hurricanes indicated that several turtles responded to the disturbances by either increasing the size of their space use (3/11), shifting their activity space to different areas (5/11), or occupying locations never before visited (5/11) after Hurricane Irma. The application of outliers was a useful tool to highlight variation associated with extreme data points relative to spatial patterns throughout each individual’s detection period. We acknowledge that the occurrences listed above relative to Hurricane Irma are not necessarily causative and that other outliers occurred outside this time period. Nevertheless, given the relatively few number of outliers across extensive individual detection periods (between 28–140 weeks) compared to those during the week following Irma, the results strongly suggest Hurricane Irma significantly influenced hawksbill behaviour short-term. Caution should also be taken when interpreting the cumulative/new activity space results because most individuals were tagged <6 weeks prior to Hurricane Irma, a period in which the total cumulative activity space was not yet reached. Consequently, it is difficult to differentiate whether the hurricane(s) caused increases in cumulative activity spaces (i.e., cumulative AKDEs in 2017) or if it was an artefact of ‘normal’ movement patterns after release (i.e., cumulative AKDEs in 2016). The former case seems more plausible, especially for activity space extent (95% AKDEs) given the steeper rise in AKDEs between ‘week 2’ and ‘week 6’ since tagging in 2017 (i.e., during Hurricane Irma) compared to turtles tagged in 2016.

There are several possible reasons for a short-term (weekly) change in activity space caused by Hurricane Irma; for example, increased foraging effort may have been necessary to meet energetic requirements after the disturbance. This behaviour has been summarized by Sergio et al.1 and includes examples of birds, bats, reptiles, and mammals increasing foraging ranges following environmental disturbances. Interestingly, it was the largest individuals that refrained from changing their activity space after Hurricane Irma. This could indicate that larger individuals are more resilient to disturbances whether it from increased energetic reserves, competitive ability, learned experience, or pre-disturbance site selection2,31. Alternatively, new sites for protection or resting may have been exploited32,33. The individuals that readily displayed increased activity space (and new space-use) predominantly inhabited the northern portion of Brewers Bay; consequently, this area could have been affected more than other locations resulting in diminished resource availability or adequate protection. However, it is difficult to be certain about locale-specific effects because receiver coverage was restricted in some locations, specifically on the west and south sides of the runway where only a line of receivers was positioned (i.e., less spatial heterogeneity). There was evidence that a few turtles (3/11) increased their space use the week prior to Hurricane Irma. It is not uncommon for animals to alter space use patterns in response to changing atmospheric pressure (i.e., atmospheric pressure dropped as the hurricanes approached)34,35,36. For example, Liu et al.37 reported the departure of sea snakes (Laticauda spp.) from a littoral habitat in Taiwan prior to typhoon Morakot, which corresponded with dropping atmospheric pressure as opposed to precipitation or windspeed. Although no turtles left Brewers Bay prior to the hurricanes, increased space use may have been a responsive or preparatory behaviour to the approaching hurricane.

It was also evident that the hurricanes had an even more immediate impact on the behaviour of juvenile hawksbill turtles in Brewers Bay. Specifically, during both hurricanes, every individual, except one (which only had two detections during the hurricane), moved to deeper water – sometimes twice as deep than routine. This behaviour never occurred outside of these periods during the month of September, supporting it as a response to the environmental disturbance, and has been reported in other marine reptiles37, fishes38, and elasmobranchs35. Deeper dives corresponded to the abrupt changes in water temperature, wind speed, and atmospheric pressure, but it is unclear which factor(s) was most critical as they were all correlated during the storm. We hypothesize that deeper water was utilized as a direct response to the physical disturbances in the water because this behaviour was only instigated once wind speeds rose above a certain level only a few hours before the peak of the storm passed St. Thomas. For several individuals, there was a shift in spatial patterns as well. For example, sea turtle 1257 primarily made the deeper dives in the deeper section of Brewers Bay, where as the remainder of September it was in shallower areas mainly at ‘Black Point’. Not surprisingly, most deep dives were made in the ‘deep’ and ‘runway’ portions of Brewers Bay, which are in or adjacent to the deepest areas within the receiver array. The movement tracks during Hurricane Irma demonstrate several individuals moving to these new deeper areas once the storm began. As previously mentioned, the individuals towards the south of the runway appeared to move less during and immediately after Irma, however less receiver coverage existed to track individuals in this area (which is adjacent to water >20 m deep). Dive times during the storm events could not be reliably calculated due to reduced receiver efficiency.

Fishes and rays
The most consistent pattern of spatial change from the hurricane was displayed by southern stingrays that expanded their activity space outward after Irma. Of particular interest were three individuals that had the greatest change in activity space and ceased to be detected in Brewers Bay a few weeks later. Prior to the hurricanes, each stingray was consistently detected nearshore within the array for approximately one year, indicating long-term residency (see also ref.39). The southern stingray is commonly identified as a generalist epibenthic and infauna consumer of invertebrates (e.g., annelids, decapods, and polychaetes) and small fishes40,41,42. It is unclear what impact the strong winds and oceanographic changes had on the shallow water prey of the tagged individuals. However, it was observed that large areas of shallow soft bottom habitats (sand and seagrass) were scoured over a meter deep exposing long buried ancient reef structures (RSN pers. obs.), which may have altered prey availability or foraging habitats, driving these individuals to deeper water outside the array or to less damaged areas. Driven by deep-water mixing during the two hurricanes, the rapid declines in water temperature of nearly 2 °C (~30–28 °C) may have disrupted metabolic functioning, as suggested by Tobin et al.43 for fishes in the Great Barrier Reef after a cyclone, although this change was within seasonal thermal fluctuations year-round (~26–30 °C). Dissolved oxygen levels, which dropped over 20% in both shallow and deep areas (by ~1–2 mg L−1) and remained low after several weeks, may have also been a contributing factor for several rays leaving the bay. Indeed, Schlaff et al.44 provide a summary of environmental variables attributed to influencing elasmobranch behaviour, including examples of animals avoiding hypoxic (reduced DO) areas (see also refs45,46).

Individual behaviours for fishes and rays in response to Hurricane Irma revealed important preliminary information concerning the effects of extreme environmental occurrences. Most notable was the majority of individuals demonstrated higher activity space size and new activity space areas immediately following Hurricane Irma, in combination with low overlap in space use between consecutive weeks. Only a few fish fell outside the upper (or lower) 75% percentile measurements. These acute changes in behavior due to a passing hurricane are in contrast to fishes that are displaying reproductive behaviours. For example, Locascio & Mann47 and Biggs et al.48 showed considerable resilience to hurricanes in two species of Sciaenidae during spawning. Both Cynoscion arenarius and Cynoscion nebulosus continued producing courtship-associated sounds during peak storm conditions. In both cases, however, the seatrout shifted their chorusing a few hours earlier for several days after the hurricane.

Although noise disturbances during the hurricanes limited our ability to track fine-scale movements, several trends were apparent. Based on the short-term movement tracks, several species (including southern stingray, lane snapper, tarpon, and mangrove snapper) moved away from shallow nearshore areas during Irma to deeper waters. For example, the activity space of the juvenile tarpon, an inshore/pelagic inhabitant in Brewers Bay, was relatively large compared to other weeks, although limited new area was utilized due to the highly mobile nature of this species49. The mangrove snapper was detected leaving the shallow lagoon area during Irma while all the southern stingrays shifted their locations to the west towards the deeper waters of Brewers Bay. Presumably, this behaviour was to seek refuge from the turbulent surface waters or as an innate flight response34. For example, in a recent study, Bacheler et al.13 reported that during passing hurricanes grey triggerfish greatly increased their rates of movement and emigration to deeper water from a deep reef (37 m) primarily in response to wind-generated wave velocity.

Conclusion
The results from this study were collected opportunistically in relation to two unpredictable and destructive storm events, thus the sample size, tagging regime (i.e., hawksbills had only been tagged a few weeks before Irma), and receiver spatial coverage (i.e., due to loss of three receivers and acoustic interference during the storm) were not optimally designed. Nevertheless, the reporting of behaviour prior to and following such a catastrophic occurrence are extremely rare and our results provide novel information concerning a variety of species-specific responses within a coastal community. Furthermore, the longevity and spatial resolution of detections provides a surfeit of baseline behavioural data to compare with the disturbance events and demonstrates the overwhelming short-term impacts hurricanes have despite their irregularity.

Animals respond to environmental disturbances in a variety of ways through changes in behaviour, demography, genetics, life history, and physiology, all of which can affect community organization1. The immediate effects of the hurricanes were evident by the movement of species to deeper waters. It was also apparent that species with small activity spaces in Brewers Bay (e.g., lane snapper and mutton snapper) shifted locations during Irma, likely to find refuge. These direct responses did not last long, however during the week following Hurricane Irma, activity spaces often shifted and expanded, suggesting short-term effects on the ability of animals to find food or other necessary resources. Apart from increased hawksbill turtle depth-use during Hurricane Maria, there was limited evidence that animals changed spatial patterns following this hurricane. Maria was less powerful than Irma on St. Thomas, resulting in heavy rainfall but less extreme wind speeds. It is probable that habitat loss and specific disturbances were already optimized after Hurricane Irma leading effects of Maria to be minimal, except in cases where individuals could not meet specific requirements in Brewers Bay, such as southern stingray. Overall, the long-term effects of both Hurricane Irma and Maria appear to be limited. The majority of species (besides stingrays) returned to the areas frequented prior to the hurricanes and demonstrated consistent activity spaces through time. Spatial patterns are not the only indicator of resilience to disturbances; therefore, we cannot comment extensively on the long-term implications on physical condition, energetics, or nutrition, but post-hurricane body conditions of turtles suggested a healthy population. For at least one species, the southern stingray, it was evident that the hurricanes disrupted long-term behaviour, suggesting they are particularly vulnerable to these extreme environmental conditions. The consequences of leaving established areas could be severe unless new reliable food sources are discovered, and protection from predators or harmful environmental conditions (e.g., temperature, oxygen, salinity, etc.) are established. The strong site fidelity, despite catastrophic storm activity, shown by the hawksbill turtles reveals the importance of established juvenile foraging grounds for this critically endangered animal. However, if severe storms or hurricanes become increasingly frequent, habitat destruction and loss of valuable resources may further prevent recovery from deleterious disturbances particularly for those species with limited resilience or specialized resource niches.

Methods
Study area and acoustic telemetry sampling
The effect Hurricane Irma and Maria had on animal behaviour was investigated using an existing acoustic telemetry array in (and around) Brewers Bay, St. Thomas, US Virgin Islands (18.3425°N, 64.9800°W; Fig. 2). Brewers Bay is a small bay (~1 km2) located adjacent to the University of the Virgin Islands and the Cyril E. King International Airport in the southwest portion of the island. The habitats within Brewers Bay (and adjacent areas) mainly consist of seagrass, sand, fringing coral and rocky reefs, patch reefs of corals and sponges, and artificial concrete structures around the airport runway. Given the small-scale variability in habitat composition, these areas were broadly categorized into four groups: shallow (<10 m bottom-depth), deep (>10 m bottom-depth), Black Point (5–30 m bottom-depth; the northern point within Brewers Bay), and runway (the southern part of Brewers Bay; Fig. 2). The artificial habitat around the runway provided both shallow foraging habitat but also dropped steeply into water 10 to 30 m deep. The array was deployed in 2015, typically consisting between 35 and 43 Vemco© VR2W-69 kHz receivers, moored near the bottom using rope and concrete blocks or sand screws in shallow soft bottom habitats. The detection range in Brewers Bay varied between habitat and tag type and based on short-term (~one week) range tests in June 2015 including receiver-transmitter distances between 25–400 m, range was estimated between ~70–100 m, 90–110 m, and 140–230 m for V9, V13, and V16 Vemco© transmitters, respectively (75% probability; Table S1; JKM pers. obs.), representing ~2 km2 of total receiver coverage across the whole array. Temperature (U22-001 HOBO® Water Temp Pro v2; Onset Computer Corporation, Bourne, MA, n = 12) and dissolved oxygen (DO; RS232 miniDOT® logger, Precision Measurement Engineering; Vista, CA, n = 2) were collected at several sites within Brewers Bay. Wind speed and atmospheric pressure obtained from NOAA National Data Buoy Center for buoys near adjacent islands St. John (station 41052), USVI and Vieques (station 41056), Puerto Rico (https://www.caricoos.org/?locale=en) were included to highlight meteorological conditions around the hurricanes.

The following animals were tracked within the Brewers Bay array with acoustic transmitters prior to and after Hurricane Irma (Table 1): juvenile hawksbill turtle (Eretmochelys imbricata; n = 11), juvenile southern stingray (Hypanus americanus; n = 4), lane snapper (Lutjanus synagris; n = 2), mangrove snapper (Lutjanus griseus; n = 1), mutton snapper (Lutjanus analis; n = 1), and a juvenile Atlantic tarpon (Megalops atlanticus; n = 1). The battery life of all transmitters extended into 2018. The main species tracked was the hawksbill sea turtle, a critically endangered species that has suffered ~80% population decline over the last 105 years50, and ≥95% population decline in Caribbean populations51,52,53. As juveniles, hawksbills recruit to nearshore reef habitats and reside locally for long-term periods26. Past research has demonstrated the debilitating effect of hurricanes on hatchling survival and nesting quality54,55, but no research has described small-scale spatial patterns of free-swimming individuals in relation to extreme weather events. Southern stingray, a subtropical demersal mesopredator typically inhabiting shallow beach, seagrass, lagoons, or reef habitats, was also tracked in this study. Limited information is available concerning the movement patterns of this common coastal species, particularly for extended periods of time. Similarly, their conservation status is ‘data deficient’56 indicating more research is broadly needed to assess populations, distribution, vulnerabilities, and resilience to natural or anthropogenic disturbances. The three snapper species, all known to make seasonal spawning migrations or participate in fish spawning aggregations outside Brewers Bay57, had smaller sample sizes, but were detected long-term, and thus were included. Similarly, a juvenile tarpon, a pelagic consumer inhabiting coastal waters often near the surface, was included in behavioural explorations.

For the hawksbill turtles, individuals were caught in Brewers Bay by hand on snorkel, and transmitters were attached to two marginal scutes (adjacent to the postcentral scutes) via plastic coated wire (after drilling two small holes at the extremity of the scutes) and marine putty (Fig. S8). The stingray and fishes were caught by hook and line, placed in fresh seawater and were turned onto their dorsal surface to induce tonic immobility58. The transmitter was surgically implanted in the gut cavity (ventral and adjacent to midline) with sterilized scalpel and forceps and the incision was closed with 2–3 chromatic gut or silk surgical sutures or staples. Surgical procedures were carried out with approval and in accordance to relevant guidelines from the University of the Virgin Islands (IRBNet ID: 747807-3) as approved by US National Marine Fisheries Service protected species permit #15809. Morphometrics (e.g., mass, carapace length, fork length, sex) were taken prior to surgery and all animals were released within the Brewers Bay array.

Data analysis
Receiver data were compiled for hawksbill turtles, fishes, and rays that were detected for at least two weeks prior to Hurricane Irma. All detections for these individuals were used for further analyses, unless otherwise stated below. After Irma, 3 of 43 receivers in Brewers Bay were lost and replaced. To ensure detections were not biased by the loss or replacement of receivers throughout the array deployment period, only receivers that were consistently deployed (and present after animals were tagged) were used in this study (n = 34 receivers). Raw detection plots were explored to inspect whether transmitters were dropped from turtles, or fishes/rays had died within the receiver array. If detections occurred consistently on only one receiver (or a small cluster of receivers with overlapping detection ranges) without any distinct behavioural pattern, the affected detections were removed.

Pursuant to the main goal of this study, space-use was estimated prior to and after Hurricanes Irma and Maria. Estimates of space-use calculated at weekly intervals were determined to be the minimum temporal resolution in which enough detections were obtained to accurately estimate spatial trends. For example, daily spatial estimates were highly variable, particularly for fishes that were not detected as consistently as hawksbill turtles or southern stingrays. Due to the catastrophic impact of Hurricane Irma compared to Hurricane Maria (at least on the island of St. Thomas), weekly spatial estimates were temporally centered around Hurricane Irma. Specifically, detections from the day that Hurricane Irma hit St. Thomas (Sep 6, 2017) were not included to ensure that reduced receiver efficiency from wind noise, large swells and water turbidity did not influence spatial estimates35. As a result, ‘week 0’ consisted of detections between Aug 30 - Sep 5, and ‘week 1’ included detections between Sep 7–13. Hurricane Maria passed through St. Thomas the night/morning of Sep 19/20; consequently, ‘week 2’ represents the week Hurricane Maria hit Brewers Bay and ‘week 3’ is the following week.

Weekly space use was estimated using autocorrelated kernel density estimates (AKDEs) described in refs59,60. This approach is advantageous compared to traditional kernel density estimates (KDEs) because it accounts for non-stationary, autocorrelated, and continuous movement processes common with acoustic telemetry data. Prior to implementation of AKDEs, the location of each detection was estimated based on probability distributions relative to the distance away from a receiver. Previous range tests in Brewers Bay were utilized to estimate the probability of a detection occurring up to 400 m from a receiver based on four different habitat/bottom compositions (Table S1). To accommodate uncertainty with animal locations (i.e., within the range of the receiver), each detection was placed at a random direction and distance weighted by the habitat-specific (and transmitter-specific) probability curves. If this new location was placed on-land, it was re-located to the receiver location. Next, centers of activity61 (COAs) were implemented at 30-min intervals to further assist with spatial and temporal autocorrelation prior to use of the kernel density estimator (i.e., mean-weighted 30-min positions will be less correlated in space and time than consecutive 3-min receiver locations). Using a mean-weighted position approach also restricted the effect of false detections (i.e., a false detection, although rare, will have a smaller impact when pooled with other detections). The 30-min time interval was selected based on guidelines provided by Simpfendorfer et al.61 in which the number of data points and unique positions are both optimized based on the time interval chosen. If a COA location was placed on-land it was re-located to a random location within the minimum convex polygon of all detections for that 30-min period. After a preliminary data exploration, only weeks with a minimum number of 15 and 25 COA positions were chosen for fishes/rays and turtles, respectively, as cut-offs to avoid calculating AKDEs from weeks with limited data. The R packages ‘move’62 and ‘ctmm’59 were used to calculate AKDEs. The optimally weighted OUF (Ornstein-Uhlenbeck-F) model with continuous velocity motion (derived from Ornstein-Uhlenbeck (OU) process) and built-in autocorrelation function was fit to the weekly COA data for each individual. The total areas for 50% and 95% utilization distributions (UDs) were calculated for each weekly AKDE to represent core areas and range extent areas used, respectively. If 50% or 95% UDs overlapped with land, that portion of area was clipped from each overall estimate.

Two approaches were used to examine whether new or different locations in Brewers Bay were used after Hurricane Irma. The first method determined the cumulative area of 50% and 95% UDs each week after tagging. Consequently, for example, if during ‘week 1’ (i.e., the week after Hurricane Irma) the cumulative area increased, then new locations/areas were utilized by an individual that week compared to all preceding weeks since tagging. The second method incorporated the spatial overlap between consecutive weeks. For example, if the area of overlap decreased between ‘week 0’ and ‘week 1’ (i.e., before and after Hurricane Irma), then different locations/areas between weeks were used. The area of overlap was calculated as the overlap area of week n with week n -1, divided by the average area of week n and n -1 combined. For weeks that did not meet the minimum requirement of detections, the cumulative and overlap area deriving from the previous week was used (or the next prior week that had enough detections). Cumulative areas for the nine hawksbill turtles (analyzed individually) tagged <5 weeks prior to Hurricane Irma were compared with four other individuals tagged during the equivalent time period in the year prior (2016) to evaluate whether increases in cumulative area, particularly in recent weeks after tagging, may have been driven by typical home range distribution/expansion after tagging, as opposed to altered behaviour due to hurricanes (e.g., greater space-use in consecutive weeks may result from normal behaviour affiliated with home range size). Weekly residency indices were also calculated to evaluate whether individuals reduced their use of Brewers Bay after Hurricane Irma. These were calculated as the number of observed weekly COAs divided by the number of weekly 30-minute COAs possible (i.e., 336 week−1). Finally, mean depths were calculated for each COA period to investigate whether depth patterns changed as a result of Hurricanes Irma and Maria.

The magnitude of Hurricane Irma produced wind speeds and wave heights several orders higher than normal in a very short time and therefore provided a unique opportunity to examine acute changes in the target animals’ normal behavior. As a result, the presence of outliers (±1.5*inter-quartile range) was used to indicate the weekly time periods when individual spatial estimates (i.e., AKDE area, overlap area, cumulative area, residency index) were higher or lower than typical throughout the detection period. This method was also deemed more informative than commonly used approaches in acoustic telemetry (e.g., generalized mixed effects models) since behavioural responses to these rare and brief environmental events varied among individuals (and species), therefore an individual-based approach to interpret the quantitative spatial metrics with the hurricanes as focal points was preferred. In addition to identifying weeks with individual outliers, principal component analysis (PCA – with covariance matrix) was used to visualize the relationship among individual hawksbill turtles and six spatial metrics (AKDE area - 50% and 95%, overlap area - 50% and 95%, cumulative area - 50% and 95%) in multivariate space. The spatial metrics for each individual were standardized as weekly ranks (as a proportion) to enable comparison among variables. Following this, only ‘week 1’ values were included in the PCA to specifically evaluate the influence Hurricane Irma had on space-use directly after. Spatial metrics with high correlations were removed from the PCA to avoid overweighting redundant variables. All turtles were grouped by size category (<40 cm, 40–50 cm, >50 cm; curved carapace length - CCL) and location of occurrence after Hurricane Irma (i.e., center of 50% AKDE in North, South, or middle of Brewers Bay) to explore potential behavioural commonalities associated with the spatial metrics. Due to difference in tagging dates, the CCL grouping described above was based on size estimates for each individual at the time of Hurricane Irma using growth curves from Hawkes et al.63. Due to the few numbers of fish and rays tagged at the time of Hurricane Irma, and because some individuals were not detected long-term following the hurricanes, the values of weekly spatial metrics were ranked relative to Hurricane Irma as opposed to outlier occurrences.

Due to the destruction of many weather stations and nearby oceanographic buoys caused by Hurricane Irma, many environmental parameters (e.g., wind speed and air pressure) during and several weeks after could not be reliably collected on St. Thomas. However, water temperature and DO data collected in Brewers Bay from loggers that survived the hurricanes, and atmospheric pressure and wind speed from oceanographic buoys near adjacent islands (St. John and Vieques), helped describe trends in behaviour associated with the hurricanes. Linear regressions tested whether these environmental parameters influenced sea turtle depth-use (using 30-min average depth measurements) immediately before (4 hrs), during (24 hrs), and after (4 hrs) the hurricanes were closest to St. Thomas. To explore whether deeper areas were used after Hurricane Irma, 100 bottom-depth values were randomly selected within the AKDE areas during the week prior to and the week after Irma. Differences in bottom-depth values between the two weeks were tested with a Mann-Whitney U test (independent samples); a non-parametric approach was used because bottom-depth distributions were often right-skewed prior to Irma and left-skewed following Irma, making transformation difficult. Finally, to test if there was a declining trend in body condition (a proxy to health) among sea turtles after the hurricanes, a paired two-tailed t-test comparing Body Condition Index (BCI = mass/curved carapace length3 × 104) values of seven turtles that were captured before and after the hurricanes was used. Alpha was set at 0.05 as a potential indicator of significance for the three tests above, although lower values are reported for better resolution. All data analysis was conducted in R version 3.4.164.

Data Availability
The datasets generated during and/or analysed during the current study are available from the corresponding author on reasonable request.

Abstract
Severe disturbances can substantially alter eco-evolutionary processes and dynamics. While the impacts of catastrophic events on the biophysical attributes of communities are sometimes assessed, their effects on the genetic patterns of species remain poorly understood. To characterize how severe disturbances impact species at the molecular level, we examined the effects of the most energetic North Atlantic hurricane season in 50 years on the genetic diversity and structure of a dispersal-limited isopod, Gnathia marleyi. We sequenced a portion of the cytochrome oxidase I gene for 432 gnathiids, collected from six localities, ranging from western Puerto Rico to St John, US Virgin Islands. Importantly, multiple years of pre-hurricane sample collection allowed us to characterize temporal genetic patterns under undisturbed conditions and detect the changes subsequent to the 2017 hurricanes. Our results revealed no change to genetic diversity or structure for the years prior to the 2017 hurricanes, with genetic structure occurring at the local and regional levels, with three main clusters corresponding to Southwest Puerto Rico, East Puerto Rico, and the US Virgin Islands. However, directly following the 2017 hurricanes, genetic diversity increased at five of the six sampled localities. Additionally, we found a clear homogenizing effect prompted by increased shared genetic diversity among geographically distant regions and sites that resulted in substantially decreased among-region and among-site differentiation. Our work shows that severe disturbances caused by major tropical hurricanes facilitate gene-flow and increase overall genetic diversity and population admixture of dispersal limited coral reef species, potentially impacting the ecology and evolution of a key regional endemic.

Introduction
A major focus in ecology has been to understand how environmental disturbances impact species and communities1. Disturbances are integral processes that can alter community assemblages, re-structure spatial distribution of species, and drive biodiversity patterns2,3,4,5. Severe disturbances often modify the physical landscape, potentially affecting habitat suitability and/or availability6. As a result, they can induce mortality and affect population connectivity, which are key biological processes that determine genetic diversity and structure of populations7. The effects of these perturbations can be observed at the molecular level by measuring changes in the spatial distribution of alleles and patterns of gene-flow; over long time scales these processes can ultimately affect population adaptation and viability8,9. For instance, wildfires and large volcanic eruptions can cause mortality and habitat fragmentation, leading to population bottlenecks and loss of genetic diversity10,11. However, if after a disturbance survival and gene-flow are high, and sites are re-colonized from multiple sources, the genetic diversity can be maintained or even increased12,13. Notably, much of disturbance ecology theory has been informed largely by terrestrial case studies while few empirical investigations have assessed the genetic signatures of severe disturbances in marine systems14.

Major tropical cyclones are amongst the most severe disturbances in marine ecosystems, particularly for shallow, coastal habitats, such as coral reefs15,16. Cyclones can damage the physical structure of coral reefs17,18, displace massive amounts of water19, diminish water quality20, and alter fish community assemblage21,22,23. The fact that major cyclones are difficult to anticipate, even at relatively short timescales, makes it difficult to conduct proper Before-After-Control-Impact (BACI) -type sampling needed to rigorously test their effects24. Nevertheless, a few studies have attempted to measure the effects of similar disturbances on the genetic structure of marine taxa. For example, Brante et al.25 found that a species’ capacity to disperse can greatly influence how it responds to major disturbance, however, they only measured changes to genetic structure following a major disturbance without sampling beforehand. Other studies that incorporated pre- and post- disturbance sampling have focused on species with high dispersal potential for which disturbance only impacted a small portion of a much wider distributional range (a mud snail and intertidal goby affected by a 2011 tsunami26,27). In another, study, pre and post-disturbance genetic structure was compared using different molecular markers with large time gaps before and after the purported disturbance (an estuarine fish impacted by a 2005 hurricane28). Thus, additional research is still required to understand the acute effects of severe environmental disturbances on the genetic diversity and structure of coastal marine species, especially for regional endemics with limited dispersal.

Gnathiid isopods (Peracarida) are a key functional group within the community of small, mobile, benthic marine invertebrates. Analogous to ticks and mosquitos, the larval stages feed on blood and body fluids of a wide range of benthic and demersal fishes29. While they occur from the intertidal to the abyss, they are particularly abundant in coral reef systems where they play a key role in cleaning symbiosis and other trophic interactions30. After feeding on a single host, first-stage juvenile gnathiids detach and shelter in the substrate where they molt into the next instar following a period of 5–7 days (in the tropics; temperate species require longer), upon which the feeding-molting cycle is repeated two additional times (Smit & Davies 2004, Tanaka 2007). After the third feeding, juveniles refuge in the benthos, where they metamorphose into adults. Unusual among parasites, adult gnathiids do not feed, and spend the entirety of their lives in the benthos. Males may live for a month or more after metamorphosis, however, females die after giving birth to about 30 live young31. Thus, tropical gnathiids can complete their life cycle in as little as 30 days30,32,33. While gnathiids can swim in short bursts, they cannot swim long distances and lack a pelagic dispersal phase (direct brooders). Although they attach to swimming hosts, their association is temporary (1–4 hours) and many of their known hosts have high site fidelity34,35,36,37,38, limiting the distance over which gnathiids can be dispersed through host-attachment39. The spatial genetic structure of gnathiid species has so far been considered only for geographically distant populations, at scales of more than 2000 km40; yet, the scale of genetic structure in dispersal-limited marine species is often much smaller41 and fine-scale population genetic structure of gnathiids remains unexplored.

Herein, we characterize the impacts of the 2017 hurricane season on the genetic diversity and structure of Gnathia marleyi42, a species of fish-parasitic gnathiid isopod endemic to the northeastern Caribbean, a region that is vulnerable to tropical cyclones. The 2017 North Atlantic hurricane season, which included two category five hurricanes, was one of the most energetically intensive of the past 50–100 years43 and caused a 25% decline of key benthic coral reef species44. We hypothesized that due to their limited innate dispersal ability and stable environmental conditions, pre-hurricane gnathiid populations would show a strong pattern of isolation by distance, with individuals collected at each locality being genetically differentiated. Following the hurricanes, we expected to find an increase in genetic diversity due to putative hurricane-induced migration among populations. Further, we expected increased gene flow to reduce population differentiation particularly among geographically close populations (e.g. at the intra-island level). Additionally, since the hurricane trajectories generally moved from east to west, we predicted the induced gene flow to be directional, with western populations receiving haplotypes from “upstream” eastern counterparts.

Materials and Methods
Gnathiids were collected between late spring and summer (May to August) of 2013–2018 from six sites in the Northeast Caribbean Sea, spanning from southwestern Puerto Rico (17°57′18.0″N 67°03′03.7″W) to southeastern St John, US Virgin Islands (18°18′58.6″N 64°43′18.8″W) (Fig. 1). La Parguera, Punta Soldado, and Lameshur Bay were each sampled multiple years prior to the hurricanes in order to measure variation in genetic diversity and structure under undisturbed conditions. Brewers Bay, Lindquist Beach, and Maho Bay were each sampled once before and once after the 2017 hurricane season. Individuals were collected from reef habitats between 3–10 m depth. Most samples were collected using light traps45 that were deployed before sunset and retrieved the following morning after sunrise. Upon retrieval, contents of light traps were filtered and visually scanned under 10x magnification to separate gnathiids from other organisms. When sampling with light traps was not possible, gnathiids were collected using live fish-baited cages placed on the reef29. Caged fish were set 30 minutes before sunset and retrieved 30 minutes before sunrise the following morning and gnathiids were then gently dislodged from the fish. All samples were preserved in 96% ethanol and stored at −20 °C.

Figure 1
figure1
Map illustrating the spatial relationships between the sites sampled. Encircled numbers indicate the geographic location of each sampling site.

Full size image
In the laboratory, individual gnathiids were placed into 2.0 ml Eppendorf tubes, rinsed with distilled water, and incubated at 37 °C until completely dry. Once dry, gnathiids were pulverized inside the Eppendorf tubes using a steel rod and used for genomic DNA (gDNA) extraction with the Invitrogen PureLink genomic DNA mini extraction kit, following the manufacturer´s protocol (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, California). The gDNA was eluted into 55 µL working stocks with a final concentration of 5–10 ng/µL. Polymerase chain reactions (PCR) were performed to amplify a ~1200 base pair fragment of the cytochrome oxidase subunit I mitochondrial DNA (COI) using the primers crust-coix1f: ACTAATCACAARGAYATTGG and crust-coix1r: TAGTCTGAGTANCGTCGWGG46. PCR reactions were performed in 10 µL volumes consisting of 3.5 µl of water, 5.0 µL QIAGEN Taq PCR master mix (Qiagen, Valencia, CA), 0.5 µL of each primer (10 µM), and 0.5 µL gDNA. The PCR temperature profile included a step of initial denaturation at 95 °C for 15 minutes, followed by 35 cycles of 94 °C for one minute, 55 °C for one minute, 72 °C for one minute, and a final extension step at 72 °C for 10 minutes. Due to the low primer specificity, species-specific primers were newly designed (gmarCOI5for: GGGATTTTTAGAGAATGAGCA and gmarCOI5rev: TCCAAACCCTGGAAGGATA) using PrimerBLAST47 and targeting a 700 bp portion of COI. Final PCR reactions consisted of 3.5 µl of water, 5.0 µL QIAGEN master mix, 0.5 µL each of forward and reverse primer (10 µM), and 0.5 µL gDNA and the following temperature profile: initial denaturation at 95 °C for 15 minutes, 35 cycles of 94 °C for 45 s, 55 °C for 45 s, and 72 °C for 45 s, and final extension at 72° for 10 minutes. PCR products were sent for sequencing at GENEWIZ (Genewiz, Leipzig, Germany). Amplicon sequences were edited using CodonCode Aligner V.8.0.1 (Codon Code Corporation, Centerville, Massachusetts) and aligned using MAFFT48 with the default parameters. The multiple sequence alignment was then translated to amino acid sequences using MEGA49 to check for stop codons. A BLAST search was performed to validate that we had amplified correct DNA amplicon. Gnathia marleyi sequences diverged from Pacific congenerics by 31.5 to 36.2% similar to values observed among Pacific gnathiids50. The final alignment was truncated to 517 homologous base pairs.

Genetic diversity indices were estimated for each sample collection, including average number of pairwise differences (Pi), haplotype diversity, and nucleotide diversity, using Arlequin 3.551. Haplotype evenness and the expected number of haplotypes (i.e. number of haplotypes standardized for sample size) were calculated using the poppr package in R52. Haplotype networks were constructed to visualize the spatial distribution of haplotypes in the samples collected before and after the hurricanes using TCS v1.2153 with a connection limit set to 95% and imported to tcsBU for graphical representation54. To assess the temporal variation of genetic diversity under undisturbed conditions, we performed permutational multivariate analysis of variance (PERMANOVA)55 considering only data collected before the storms. The effect of Year (year of sample collection) was tested for each molecular diversity index, with permutations constrained within Site (sample location). To test whether the 2017 hurricanes significantly altered genetic diversity, PERMANOVAs were performed for each molecular index with Disturbance (data from pre/post-hurricanes) and Site as factors (Disturbance x Site), and by constraining permutations within Site. For all analyses, Manhattan distances were used, and 10,000 permutations were performed. PERMANOVAs were performed in R using the function adonis implemented in the vegan package56.

Pairwise PhiST comparisons were used to assess temporal genetic differentiation within-site under undisturbed conditions, using only pre-hurricane samples for sites with multiple years of sampling (La Parguera, Punta Soldado, Lameshur Bay). To assess whether the 2017 hurricanes altered differentiation within-site and among-sites, pairwise PhiST tests were also performed using pre- and post-hurricane datasets. Since PhiST values within sites were not significantly different between years sampled prior to the 2017 hurricane season, all sample collections prior to 2017 hurricanes were pooled per site prior to estimation of pairwise PhiST values between pre- and post-hurricane datasets. Statistical significance of pairwise PhiST values were corrected for multiple tests with a Holm-Bonferroni correction57. Finally, an analysis of molecular variance (AMOVA) was used to test two population structure scenarios: a) complete panmixia, and b) population structure at the regional level, according the haplogroups recovered from the haplotype network and to the geographical proximity among sites (i.e. La Parguera-W. Puerto Rico; Punta Soldado-E. Puerto Rico; U.S. Virgin Islands). AMOVAs were performed separately for pre- and post- hurricane datasets to assess whether the amount of genetic variance explained by among-site and/or among-group differences changed after the 2017 hurricane season. PhiST estimates and AMOVAs were calculated in Arlequin 3.5 based on pairwise differences among haplotypes and 10,000 permutations of the data.

To test whether gnathiids are structured following a pattern of isolation by distance (IBD), a linear regression of the geographic distance between sampling locations onto pairwise PhiST values was performed. Geographic distances were square root transformed to normalize distributions, and analyses were run using R. The IBD test was performed for both pre-hurricane samples and post- hurricane samples.

Finally, to infer migration events and directionality of geneflow before and after the storms, we performed Monte Carlo resampling under a Bayesian framework using Geneclass258. We selected the log_home/log_max assignment criteria to identify first-generation migrants and their likely population of origin with populations assigned according to sampling locality. Analyses were performed using the Bayesian method described in Rannala and Mountain59 and implemented the Paetkau et al.60 simulation algorithm, with the number of individuals set to 100,000 and the alpha value set to 0.005.

Results
In total, 432 gnathiids were sequenced across sites and years (Table 1). Overall, genetic diversity was highest at the center of the study area and lower toward the margins. Punta Soldado and Brewers Bay generally showed higher genetic diversity such as absolute number of haplotypes, Pi, and nucleotide diversity, while La Parguera and Lameshur Bay showed the lowest overall diversity (Table 1). On the other hand, evenness was highest in Lameshur Bay but decreased along awesterly gradient. Pre-hurricane haplotype networks revealed three main haplogroups (A–C; Fig. 2), differing by 5 to 12 mutations. Haplogroup A contained seven haplotypes, which were exclusive to La Parguera with the exception of one haplotype (hap_41) that was shared with Punta Soldado. Haplogroup B had ten haplotypes and was predominantly represented by individuals from Punta Soldado. Haplogroup C was comprised of 13 haplotypes shared between sample collections from the U.S. Virgin Islands, with one haplotype found predominantly in Punta Soldado. The two most common gnathiid haplotypes (hap_09 and hap_15) belonged to haplogroup C.

Table 1 Summary of molecular diversity indices per site and per year. Geographic regions are indicated above each site.
Full size table
Figure 2
figure2
Haplotype networks representing the genetic diversity of Gnathia marleyi and its spatial distribution before and after the 2017 hurricanes. Pre- and post-hurricane datasets are indicated by panels I and II, respectively. The haplotypes found in both pre- and post-hurricane datasets are indicated by haplotype number. Haplogroups A, B, and C are indicated by dashed boxes.

Full size image
The post-hurricane haplotype network revealed the same three haplogroups but the overall topology of the network changed, with haplogroups now differing only by 4 to 5 mutations. The reticulation in the post-hurricane haplotype network was the result of a new haplotype (hap_03) recovered in Lindquist Beach, which connected haplogroups A and C by five mutation steps. The most notable changes in haplotype distribution were the presence of haplogroup A sequences (hap_43) in Maho Bay (previously found only in Puerto Rico), and of haplogroup C sequences (hap_15 and hap_24) in La Parguera (previously absent from this location). Haplogroup B was still predominantly represented by individuals from Punta Soldado, however an increase in individuals collected at this locality and assigned to haplogroups A and C was observed. After the 2017 hurricane season, the overall proportion of haplotypes belonging to group C increased substantially (pre-hurricane: 43.3%, post-hurricane: 59.4%), mostly driven by an increase in singleton haplotypes. Moreover, after the 2017 hurricanes, a greater proportion of individuals collected from the U.S. Virgin Islands had haplotypes that clustered into groups A and B, and the most abundant haplotype overall (hap_15) had representatives from every site sampled (Supplementary information, Table S1).

PERMANOVAs showed that prior to the 2017 hurricanes, the genetic diversity indices did not differ between years within sites (see Table S2 in Supporting Information). PERMANOVA results also showed that the molecular diversity indices were significantly different between sites and that effect of the hurricanes was significant and increased the expected number of haplotypes, Pi, and nucleotide diversity within sites (see Table S3). In addition, the interaction between Disturbance and Site had a significant effect in haplotype evenness (R2 = 0.21, p = 0.01), indicating that the impact of hurricanes on evenness varied among sites (see Table S3).

Within-site pairwise PhiST estimates did not differ between years under undisturbed conditions (p > 0.05; see Table S4) or between pre- and post-hurricane datasets (p > 0.05; see Table S4). On the other hand, among-site pairwise PhiST estimates pre-hurricanes showed significant genetic divergence between La Parguera and all other sample collections (Table 2). Similarly, PhiSTs estimated for Punta Soldado were also significantly different from all other sample collections although values were lower than those estimated for La Parguera. Within the U.S. Virgin Islands low but significant differences were found only between Brewers Bay and Lameshur Bay (p < 0.05). The same overall pattern of among-site genetic differentiation was observed after the 2017 hurricanes, with individuals from La Parguera and Punta Soldado significantly differentiated from all other sites. However, nearly all pairwise PhiST estimates decreased after the hurricanes with the only increase in differentiation found between Brewers Bay and Lameshur Bay (see Fig. S1).

Table 2 Summary of pairwise PhiST values among all sampling localities. Pairwise comparisons that are statistically significant are indicated with an asterisk.
Full size table
For both pre- and post-hurricane datasets, the scenario a) of global panmixia among G. marleyi sample collections was rejected by AMOVA results (FST pre:0.581 and post:0.474;  p < 0.05, Table 3), indicating significant spatial genetic structure in the data. Scenario b) of population structure according to regional groups showed significant among-group differences before the 2017 hurricanes (FCT pre:0.688; p < 0.05), but not after the hurricanes (FCT post:0.578, p > 0.05; Table 3). Additionally, differences among-sites within group were not significant pre-hurricanes (FSC pre:0.017; p > 0.05) but were significant in post-hurricane datasets (post:0.050,  p < 0.05; Table 3). This latter result is likely driven by the increased differentiation between Lameshur Bay and Brewers Bay (Table 2). Overall, the percent of genetic variation explained by among group differences decreased from 68.8% to 57.8% after the hurricanes, and the percent of variation explained by within-sites variability increased from 30.7% to 40.1% (Table 3).

Table 3 Summary of AMOVA results. AMOVAs testing panmixia (a) included a single group consisting of all sampling sites. AMOVAs testing structure at the regional level (b) are grouped by group1: La Parguera, group2: Punta Soldado, and group3: Brewers Bay, Lindquist Beach, Maho Bay, and Lameshur Bay. Asterisk indicate significant genetic structure at a given level.
Full size table
The linear regression between genetic and geographic distances was significant for both pre- and post- hurricane datasets (p < 0.05, adjusted R2 = 0.82, 0.94, respectively), suggesting a clear and consistent pattern of IBD in G. marleyi (Fig. 3). The Geneclass2 analysis detected seven first-generation migrants in the entire dataset with probabilities < 0.005. Additionally it showed somewhat distinct patterns of gene flow before and after the hurricanes (Supplemental Table S5). Before the 2017 hurricane season, two first-generation migrants were detected between Punta Soldado and Brewers Bay and one between Lameshur Bay and Punta Soldado, with gene flow occurring in opposite directions along 34–57 km (Table S5). In turn, four first-generation migrants were detected after the hurricanes between Punta Soldado and Lindquist Beach (n = 1), Lameshur Bay and Brewers Bay (n = 1), and between the two most distant sampling localities, La Parguera and Maho Bay (n = 2). Gene flow after the 2017 hurricanes occurred also in both eastward as well as westward directions and over distances of 31–260 km.

Figure 3
figure3
Scatter plot illustrating the relationship between geographic distance and genetic distance (Pairwise PhiST). Shaded region indicates the 95% confidence interval for the adjusted R2.

Full size image
Discussion
In accordance with our expectations, the results from the present work confirm that G. marleyi exhibits generally limited dispersal ability, with genetic differentiation between sample collections conforming to a pattern of isolation by distance. Specifically, prior to the 2017 hurricane season, gnathiid sample collections were genetically differentiated at the regional level (>100 km), with geographically distant locations showing the largest genetic distances (i.e. La Parguera vs. sites in the U.S. Virgin Islands; Fig. 3). At the local level (<30 km, i.e. within the US Virgin Islands), no significant differences were detected among sites except between Lameshur and Brewers Bay, the two most distant sites within that region. Based on our data, under stable environmental conditions, gene-flow among gnathiid populations appears to be limited to around 40 km. Indeed, the first-generation migrants detected prior to the hurricanes only dispersed among Punta Soldado and the U.S. Virgin Islands sites, and samples were generally included in separate, well resolved haplogroups. In contrast, following the 2017 hurricane season, individuals were displaced between La Parguera and Maho Bay, a distance of more than 250 km. These results strongly suggest that hurricanes mediate long distance gene flow in this species, but contradict our original hypothesis of westward migration following the hurricane trajectories. Although the three main haplogroups were maintained following the 2017 storms, there was enough gene flow to substantially increase the genetic heterogeneity within sites and have a homogenizing effect among regional groups (i.e. increased diversity shared among sites and among groups).

Previous studies on the impacts of other types of environmental disturbance on other coastal species have also found that genetic diversity can be maintained or even increased after major disturbances. For instance, genetic diversity of marine iguanas was maintained despite high mortalities following the El Niño Southern Oscillation in 199861. Similarly, genetic diversity of intertidal gobies did not change after the record earthquake and subsequent tsunami that struck eastern Japan in 201126. Interestingly, although within-population abundances of a widespread intertidal mud snail, Batillaria attramentaria, showed strong declines after the 2011 tsunami, the direct impact of this disturbance on genetic diversity is difficult to assess given the large temporal variability observed in both pre- and post-tsunami conditions27. Only one previous study attempted to examine the effects of a tropical cyclone on the genetic structure of an aquatic organism28. In that study, the authors compared genetic diversity of a single population of the estuarine poeciliid fish Poecilia latipinna obtained with microsatellite data after hurricane Dennis in 2005, with those obtained with alloenzyme data 20 years prior62. In their study, they observed an increase in genetic diversity and reduced population differentiation which they attributed to the storm surge driven by the cyclone. However, the 20-year time lag between two sampling points and the differences in molecular markers made it difficult to link this change to the hurricane itself.

While the above-mentioned studies provided important insights regarding the potential impacts of disturbances on gene flow of marine taxa, they focused on species with innate potential for long distance dispersal, and thus theoretically more resilient to disturbance. Importantly, only Miura et al.27 and the present study included pre-disturbance temporal replication and estimates of differentiation for multiple populations. In the present work, annual sample collections allowed the analysis of non-overlapping generations of G. marleyi, consequently, we were able to unequivocally assess the effects that major hurricanes can have on the genetic diversity patterns of regional endemics with limited dispersal.

Although our study focused on a single species, inferences gained herein may extend to other species with similar ecologies and geographic distribution. For instance, otherwise dispersal-limited marine coastal species may benefit from increased and more frequent long distance dispersal events in regions periodically affected by tropical cyclones, especially since storm intensity and frequency is expected to increase due to ongoing climate change63,64. Ultimately, such events can contribute to changes in geographic distribution and the evolutionary potential of these species. While increased gene-flow and genetic diversity may buffer species from the loss of alleles due to genetic drift following stochastic demographic events, such as population bottlenecks65, these same processes may also dilute or even displace locally adapted alleles66,67. Aside from potentially impacting evolutionary outcomes of species, major disturbances may more immediately influence ecological interactions. In the case of parasitic gnathiid isopods, in addition to the direct effects on hosts via tissue damage and blood loss33, they can also function as vectors of diseases68,69,70. Understanding the spatial scales at which these potential vectors may spread and how major disturbances might alter such patterns is therefore critical.

The work presented here characterizes the acute effects of a severe climatic disturbance on the genetic diversity and structure of a coastal marine species. We demonstrate that major hurricanes can increase genetic diversity and reduce genetic differentiation locally and regionally, in a low-dispersal coral reef species. Besides tropical cyclones, coral reef ecosystems face numerous other threats prompted by global climate change, such as bleaching events, rising sea levels, and increased ocean acidification71,72,73 and these are also known to impact the ecology of gnathiids74. Clearly, more molecular studies are needed to address how these disturbances can affect other members of the coral reef community, including cryptic species, to better understand their potential resilience to future disturbances.

Global biodiversity hotspots (GBHs) are increasingly vulnerable to human stressors such as anthropogenic climate change, which will alter the ecology of these habitats, even where protected. The longleaf pine (Pinus palustris) ecosystem (LPE) of the North American Coastal Plain is a GBH where disturbances are integral for ecosystem maintenance. However, stronger storms due to climate change may be outside their historical norm. In this study, we estimate the extent of Florida LPE that was directly affected by Hurricane Michael in 2018, an unprecedented Category 5 storm. We then leveraged a unique data set in a Before-After study of four sites within this region. We used variable-area transects and generalized linear mixed-effects models to estimate tree densities and logistic regression to estimate mortality by size class. We found at least 28% of the global total remaining extent of LPE was affected in Florida alone. Mortality was highest in medium sized trees (30–45 cm dbh) and ranged from 4.6–15.4% at sites further from the storm center, but increased to 87.8% near the storm center. As the frequency and intensity of extreme events increases, management plans to mitigate climate change need to account for large-scale stochastic mortality events to preserve critical habitats.

Introduction
Ecological disturbances play an integral role in maintaining ecosystem structure and functioning1,2,3. Many ecological disturbances are expected to change with anthropogenic climate change4, altering the frequency, intensity, duration, and timing of events5. Shifting disturbance regimes due to climate change pose a threat to the conservation of biodiversity as species experience conditions outside their historical norms6,7,8. In savanna systems, which are characterized by a grassy or herbaceous understory and low tree densities, changing disturbance regimes can trigger demographic transitions altering the density of trees9,10,11, upon which biodiversity depends.

Longleaf pine (Pinus palustris Mill.) habitats located within the North American Coastal Plain (NACP) are a global biodiversity hotspot12,13. These savanna-type systems provide critical habitat for numerous endangered plant and animal species, which are dependent on the presence of sparse but critically important mature longleaf pine trees14,15,16,17. The canopy of longleaf pine habitats is generally monotypic, with a range of tree densities (from <100 to 300+ tree/ha), a largely open canopy, and an herbaceous, grass dominated understory18,19,20. Frequent seasonal fire is an integral part of this ecosystem and is the most important process for maintaining ecosystem structure and function12,21,22,23,24. The highest quality stands are dominated by mature trees with a sufficiently frequent fire interval (1–5 year return) to promote regeneration and maintain a highly biodiverse understory – containing as many as >40 species per m2,17,25,26,27,28. Canopy gaps are critical in promoting this biodiverse understory29 and allow for recruitment and regeneration of longleaf pine30,31. Gaps allow for greater light penetration and colonization by shade-intolerant species32,33. Most successful recruitment of longleaf pine requires exposed bare mineral soil and patches in the canopy to be opened up by disturbances such as fire, wind, or rain events30,31,34.

Florida, and more specifically the Florida Panhandle, is one of the most important strongholds of endangered longleaf pine habitat35,36 containing 50% and 28%, respectively, of all the remaining longleaf pine ecosystem37,38,39. Florida, and the NACP in general, borders the Gulf and Atlantic coast, and is subject to frequent storm events12. Thus disturbances in these regions include hurricanes and other extreme wind and rain events, in addition to fire1,40. Over the course of a century, the entire range of the NACP will have experienced at least one major hurricane (Category 3 and above)32,40,41. Numerous studies have assessed the damage to forests and savannas in the NACP after major storm events42,43,44,45,46. Species that evolved within the coastal plain, such as longleaf pines, bald cypress, and live oaks, have been shown to have lower mortality from hurricanes44,45,47,48,49,50 than species whose evolutionary range extends beyond the coastal plain region (such as loblolly pine or water oak), possibly due to strong selection pressure from frequent exposure to high wind storms44. However, longleaf pines grow at low densities and are highly susceptible to wind flow in extreme wind events51. In addition, as the climate changes, high wind storm events such as hurricanes and tornadoes will increase in strength and/or frequency, outside of the system’s historic norms5,52,53,54.

Hurricanes may contribute to gap dynamics in longleaf systems by removing older, rotten trees and other species that may compete for light and other resources with understory components1,19,32,34,48,55. While gap dynamics driven by typical tropical storm events, in addition to low intensity fires, play an important role in maintaining these open-canopied habitats, the potential for hurricanes of increasing strength to occur over the next century5,52,53 could lead to severe damage and potentially permanent losses of remnant stands of an already vulnerable system12,35. The loss of mature trees, creation of large canopy gaps, and severe damage to the understory from extreme events can have negative effects on numerous species that depend on mature trees, impede natural regeneration, alter the fire regime, increase the chance of invasive species establishment, and provide favorable conditions for insect outbreaks4,5,56,57,58,59,60.

On October 10th, 2018 Hurricane Michael made landfall in the Florida Panhandle as the first Category 5 storm on modern record in the region. It was the strongest hurricane to make landfall in the continental U.S. since Hurricane Andrew in 1992, with maximum sustained winds of 257 km/h and minimum barometric pressure of 919 mb61,62. This study takes advantage of four sites of longleaf pine habitat within the path of Hurricane Michael, which were fortuitously censused during the summer before the hurricane and occur over a gradient of hurricane impact (Fig. 1). These sites were measured again after the hurricane to quantify a range of hurricane effects on longleaf forests. The objectives of this study were to (1) determine the extent of longleaf pine habitat in Florida impacted by Hurricane Michael using Geographic Information Systems (GIS) and the Longleaf Pine Ecosystem Geodatabase (LPEGDB)39, (2) perform Before-After field surveys of tree density and estimate mortality by size class (juvenile, small-mature, medium-mature, and large-mature) at four sites within the path of the storm using generalized linear models, and (3) compare damage types (uprooted, snapped, crown damage) at these sites, which occur in different community types that differ in their soils, hydrology, and species composition. We discuss implications of increasingly strong and frequent storms for management and restoration of this global biodiversity hotspot.

Figure 1
figure1
Map of study sites and storm coverage. Hurricane Michael made landfall as a Category 5 hurricane on October 10th, 2018 near Mexico Beach, FL, USA. Maximum sustained winds at landfall were approximately 257 km/h and minimum barometric pressure was 919 mb. Hurricane-force winds extended outward from the center up to 75 km and tropical storm force winds extended outward up to 280 km61,62. The four study sites in the Florida Panhandle in the path of Hurricane Michael include: Apalachee WMA, Joe Budd WMA, Apalachicola NF, and St. Marks NWR. The “known” longleaf pine habitat is extracted from the LPEGDB39. Map created in ArcMap 10.6.186.

Full size image
Results
Extent of longleaf pine habitat impacted by hurricane michael
Within the Florida Panhandle, tropical storm force winds (280 km buffer61,62) generated by the storm impacted at least 533,000 ha of “known” longleaf pine habitat, i.e., habitat that has been confirmed through field surveys according to the LPEGDB39. As much as 1,043,000 ha may possibly have been affected when including “known”, as well as “expected” (15,000 ha) and “potential” habitat (495,000 ha; see Methods). Hurricane force winds (75 km buffer61,62) occurred over 114,000 ha of “known” longleaf pine habitat. An additional 4,000 ha of “expected” and an additional 54,000 ha of “potential” habitat were also within the hurricane force winds buffer, for a possible total of 172,000 ha. The areas affected by hurricane force winds include large areas of managed lands with critical remaining habitat for longleaf and other threatened habitats, including the Apalachicola National Forest and Torreya State Park, as well as smaller, more isolated managed areas such as Apalachicola Bluffs and Ravines Preserve and Three Rivers State Park. The areas affected by tropical storm force winds extend further into the Panhandle and north-central Florida and include critical management areas such as Eglin Air Force Base and Blackwater River State Forest to the west and Osceola National Forest to the east.

Changes in longleaf densities pre- and post-hurricane and estimates of mortality
The wet flatwoods site at St. Marks National Wildlife Refuge (NWR), furthest from the storm center (85 km, Fig. 1), showed the least effect of Hurricane Michael; with no significant change in overall tree density (p = 0.8; Fig. 2, Table 1, Supplementary Figure S1). Mature trees were only represented by the small-mature size class (15–30 cm dbh) at this site (Table 1). Overall estimated mortality, i.e., the ratio of dead to total (living and dead) trees across all represented size classes, was 7.4% (95% CI: 1.3–21.1%) (Fig. 3). There was a significant decrease in tree density in the juvenile size class (p < 0.0001; Table 1, Supplementary Figure S1). There was no significant change in density in the small-mature size class (p > 0.88; Table 1, Supplementary Figure S1). The only documented mortality was in the smallest mature size class (8.7% mortality; CI: 1.9–25.1%), where 4 trees/ha were snapped (Table 2).

Figure 2
figure2
Pre- and post-hurricane living and dead tree density frequency histogram. (a) Histograms of pre- and post- hurricane living tree densities from each cell in all plots show the most dramatic change in tree density at Apalachee WMA, whereas other sites show less change or no detectable change. Group means of living tree density are indicated by dashed lines. Each site is scaled on a different x-axis for clearer visualization. Sites are listed in order of decreasing distance to the storm center. (b) Histograms of dead tree densities from each cell in all plots at all sites post-hurricane. The mean overall dead tree densities are indicated by dashed lines.

Full size image
Table 1 Density assessment of longleaf pine trees pre- and post- Hurricane Michael.
Full size table
Figure 3
figure3
Estimated longleaf pine mortality by size class. We estimated site level mortality (overall and by size class) using logistic regression. Estimated mean percent mortality value for each size class and overall is indicated on the plots. Overall percent mortality at each site is in red. 95% confidence intervals are presented in the error bars. Sites are listed in order of decreasing distance to the storm center. Trees that were partially uprooted, uprooted, snapped, or had canopy damage of >90% were used to estimate mortality. Size classes are as follows: juveniles (<15 cm dbh), small-mature (15–30 cm dbh), medium-mature (30–45 cm dbh), or large-mature (45 + cm dbh).

Full size image
Table 2 Damage Classification.
Full size table
The sandhill forest at Joe Budd Wildlife Management Area (WMA) was the next furthest site from the storm center (56 km, Fig. 1). This site had no significant changes in tree densities pre- and post-hurricane (p > 0.05; Fig. 2, Table 1, Supplementary Figure S1), except in the juvenile size class (p < 0.001). This site had the highest overall tree density and all size classes were represented (Table 1). Overall estimated mortality was 4.6% (95% CI: 1.9–9.1%) (Fig. 3). The apparent increase in density in the small-mature size class was not statistically significant (p = 0.38; Table 1, Supplementary Figure S1). All the trees that were observed to have died were in the medium-mature size class (30–45 cm dbh) and snapped rather than uprooted (Table 2). Mortality in the medium-mature size class was 9.5% (95% CI: 4.1–18.6%).

The wet flatwoods site in Apalachicola National Forest (NF) was closer, only 35 km from the hurricane path (Fig. 1). The overall living tree densities were again similar and had no significant change from pre- to post-hurricane (p = 0.87; Table 1, Fig. 2, Supplementary Figure S1). This site had a higher overall tree density than St. Marks NWR and had trees in all size classes except the largest size class (45 + cm dbh). Overall mortality was 15.4% (95% CI: 5.1–32.2%) (Fig. 3). The apparent increases in density overall, overall mature, and in the small-mature size class were not statistically significant (p = 0.87, 0.96, 0.43, respectively; Table 1, Supplementary Figure S1). Mortality across size classes showed greater mortality in the mature size classes; up to 14.3% (95% CI: 3.1–38.5%) in the small-mature size class and 33.3% (95% CI: 7.7–71.9) in the medium-mature size class (Fig. 3). All trees that died were uprooted or partially uprooted (Table 2).

Finally, the Apalachee Wildlife Management Area (WMA) site was directly in the path of Hurricane Michael (2 km, Fig. 1) and easily the most severely impacted (Fig. 4). All size classes were represented at this site (Table 1). Medium, large, overall, and overall mature size classes showed significant decreases in living tree densities (p = 0.003, 0.04, 0.002, and 0.007, respectively; Fig. 2, Table 1, Supplementary Figure S1). The apparent increase in density in the small-mature size class was not statistically significant (p = 0.9; Table 1, Supplementary Figure S1). Overall mortality was estimated at 87.8% (95% CI: 80.8–93.1%) (Fig. 3). Mortality was highest in the medium-mature size class at 97.6% (95% CI: 92.4–99.5%), followed by small-mature trees at 75% (95% CI: 50.9–90.9%), then large-mature trees at 50% (95% CI: 12.3–87.7%) (Fig. 3). Almost all trees at this site had some visible damage and most dead trees were snapped (48.3%) (Table 2).

Figure 4
figure4
Apalachee WMA. Pre-hurricane, July 7th, 2018 (top, image: C. Anderson) and post-hurricane, December 1st, 2018 (bottom, image: N. Zampieri).

Full size image
Discussion
The Florida Panhandle is a stronghold for the longleaf pine ecosystem, with more connected, protected longleaf pine habitat than anywhere else in its range37,38. Considering that the total range of longleaf pine habitat is estimated at 1.9 million ha63, our results show that 28% and 6% of all remaining “known” longleaf pine habitat experienced tropical storm and hurricane force winds, respectively, in Florida alone. Understanding the extent of habitat impacted by this one extreme storm highlights the importance of conserving large and connected areas since varying tree mortality, degrees of habitat integrity, and vulnerability to storm damage exist within this range. While the storm had an extremely wide breadth (560 km diameter), the greatest impact of the storm was highly localized to the area immediately in the path of the storm center. The majority of impacted habitat likely benefitted from the low tree mortality and subsequent opening of canopy gaps. However, for the region within the path of the storm center, longleaf pine habitats were severely impacted. Our results show that longleaf mortality ranged from 4.6–87.8% across sites and medium sized trees (30–45 cm dbh) were the most vulnerable due to snapping (Fig. 3, Table 2).

Since longleaf pines are the dominant and often the only canopy species in these systems, their mortality is necessary for creating canopy gaps30,34 that promote the unique biodiversity in this habitat8,30,34. Currently, lightning is considered to be the primary cause of mortality in longleaf pines, estimated to be 0.29–0.46 trees ha−1 year−164,65, and therefore is seen as the main driver of gap dynamics64,65,66. Platt and Rathbun (1992) recognized that the rate of mortality due to hurricanes exceeded that of lightning strikes when considered over a longer timeframe (e.g., 10 years). Our study shows mortality between 4–125 trees ha−1 (Table 2), 14–425 times higher, occurring during just one extreme event in one concentrated area. Furthermore, trees with minor damage or canopy damage may experience delayed mortality due to storm related injuries5,34. In the Florida Panhandle alone, there have been 10 major hurricanes to make landfall since 185167. Given the average return interval for a hurricane in the Florida Panhandle of 9–13 years41, or 1 major hurricane every 2 years for the entire U.S. coastline41, it is possible that historically hurricanes may have played a more important role in maintaining gap dynamics of longleaf pines than lightning at longer temporal scales. However, lightning kills individual trees, which promotes heterogeneity across the landscape64, whereas hurricanes impact large swaths of the landscape, creating a more homogenous effect, especially near the strongest part of the storm. After Hurricane Hugo (Category 4, 1989), second-growth stands of longleaf in South Carolina experienced 95% adult tree mortality68. Hurricane Kate (Category 3, 1985) resulted in over 20% mortality of adult longleaf from an old-growth stand, with effects continuing for at least 5 years post-hurricane34. These strong storms represent the degree of impact that is predicted to increase with current anthropogenic climate change.

The four sites surveyed in this study represent two distinct community types, which, in addition to distance to the storm center, may have played a role in the type of tree damage caused by high wind events. Wet flatwoods (WF) and upland pine (UP) communities differ in species composition and structure, hydrology, and soil type18. WF sites are inundated for parts of the year, and the water table is relatively close to the surface18. In contrast, upland pine sites are dry, well drained, and have a greater distance between the water table and the surface. Trees in wet or mesic habitats develop a shorter taproot and may be more likely to be uprooted in high wind events69, whereas in xeric habitats trees develop a longer taproot which makes them more likely to snap or have crown damage18,34,69. At the WF site in Apalachicola NF, all dead trees were uprooted or partially uprooted. In the case of St. Marks NWR, the other WF site, all dead trees were snapped (4 trees ha−1), though it was also the furthest from the storm center (85 km) and experienced low mortality overall. At the UP sites, as expected, trees were more likely to be snapped than uprooted. All the trees that died at Joe Budd WMA (56 km away) were snapped and at Apalachee WMA the most common damage type was snapping (48.3%), followed by uprooting (31.7%).

In general, and especially at Apalachee WMA, mortality increased with size from juvenile to mature size classes, and then decreased in the largest mature size class when those size classes were present (Fig. 3). The medium-mature size class was the most represented in this study, and thus had a greater exposure risk than other size classes. However, we expected lower mortality in the juvenile size class because the juvenile wood of longleaf pine trees, with a high proportion of living sapwood to heartwood, is more elastic than mature wood, providing greater resistance to high wind51,70. Our results are consistent with other studies, such as in an assessment of hurricane-induced mortality of longleaf pines in South Carolina where lower mortality (<20%) in juvenile-younger mature size classes was found in comparison to larger mature size classes, which had up to 95% mortality71. At an old-growth stand of longleaf pines in Georgia and at a stand of south Florida slash pine (Pinus elliottii var. densa) hurricane induced mortality rates were also higher in the larger size classes34,72.

The significant loss of mature trees reduces the current extent of mature habitat, on which many critically endangered species depend17. High mortality in the medium and large mature size classes can have important implications for the recovery of the system because the larger trees produce the most reproductive cones34 and produce the most leaf litter, an important component of the ecology of fuels60. Large-mature trees (>45 cm dbh) had lower rates of mortality than medium-mature trees when present – as much as 50% lower (Apalachee WMA, Fig. 3). However, this size class was the least represented in our study, only found at the UP sites and in low quantities. Another explanation for the lower rate of mortality in the large-mature class could be that since these trees are generally fewer in number than other size classes, the surviving individuals could have traits that have enabled their survival thus far and therefore are more resilient to high winds (e.g. a deeper taproot, fewer lower branches contributing to structural imbalance, or differences in wood density)55,73,74,75. More study is needed to determine if large-mature trees are in fact less vulnerable to strong storms.

While the remaining juveniles could represent the potential for recovery, this depends on managing potential pests and invasive species and reintroducing fire quickly, which may require substantial efforts to remove fallen trees and debris. Active fire management will be critical to restoration in longleaf pine habitats affected by Hurricane Michael and future extreme storm events21,22,23,60,76. Reintroducing fire soon after such a concentrated mortality event will aid in the reduction of woody plants that are benefiting from the reduced competition and canopy gaps60. In all instances where trees were killed, by snapping or uprooting, the increased biomass on the ground contributes to fuels for fire and at a fine-scale change fire behavior by creating microsites that burn at hotter temperatures for longer amounts of time77,78. In order to reintroduce fire to some of the more heavily damaged sites, low impact timber salvage may be necessary to remove dangerous fuel sources, reduce smoke emissions, and open up the understory to promote fire contiguity while minimizing risk of severe wildfire and impact to the soil and understory71,79. In the site that experienced the highest rates of mortality, where the mature trees were severely reduced (Fig. 4), restoration may require planting of seedlings as natural regeneration may be impeded by the disruption to the seed bank and ability to manage with prescribed fire due to debris and negative impacts of salvage logging43,60,68. Even then, recovery could take decades for juveniles to reach mature size classes (Fig. 4). These changes in the ecology of fuels will have significant ramifications for the long-term maintenance of biodiversity, structural diversity, and the recovery of the system60.

Conclusion
In the NACP, storms of increasing strength and frequency pose a significant threat to the longleaf pine ecosystem and the numerous species that depend on it. Here we take advantage of a fortuitous census of four sites before Hurricane Michael struck North Florida then create a Before-After study of hurricane effects in longleaf pine habitats in the direct path of the hurricane. We show that Hurricane Michael resulted in varying rates of mortality on longleaf pines in the Florida Panhandle with the most severe impact highly localized to the center of the storm and resulting in catastrophic losses of mature canopy trees (up to 98%). This study focuses on the impact of Hurricane Michael in Florida, but the storm impacted most states within the NACP, all containing critical longleaf pine habitat. The increasing frequency of extreme stochastic events requires updating restoration and management plans for critical habitats7. The remaining extent of longleaf pine ecosystems exist in varying degrees of habitat integrity37 and even protected high quality habitat is ecologically vulnerable to climate change. Moving forward, we must consider the implications of changing disturbance regimes due to anthropogenic climate change on the ecology of critical habitats.

Methods
Hurricane coverage and extent of impacted habitat
Data on the storm track and wind extent was obtained from the National Hurricane Center. Hurricane force winds extended outward from the storm center for 75 km and tropical storm force winds extended 280 km62. Using ArcMap 10.6.1, we created buffers around the storm track for hurricane and tropical storm force winds. We then overlaid the buffers on longleaf pine habitat coverage within Florida obtained from the Longleaf Pine Ecosystem Geodatabase (LPEGDB) (https://www.fnai.org/longleafgdb.cfm). The LPEGDB is a publicly available geodatabase managed by the Florida Natural Areas Inventory (FNAI) with extensive data on the distribution and ecological condition of longleaf pine habitat in Florida. FNAI identified pinelands using aerial images, data provided by agencies, field surveys, and parcel data. Pinelands were then classified by longleaf pine occurrence as “known”, “expected”, “potential”, or “pinelands other than longleaf”. According to FNAI, “known” habitat has been confirmed through field surveys, “expected” are expected to be longleaf dominated based on historical vouchers, natural community type, and/or presence of red-cockaded woodpeckers, and “potential” are identified as having a community type that may be suitable for longleaf but there are no records of presence and further assessment is needed37,39. We then extracted the area of known, expected, and potential longleaf habitat within the hurricane force and tropical storm force wind buffers to determine the known and potential extent of habitat impacted by the storm within Florida.

Site description
In the summer of 2018, pre-Hurricane Michael, we surveyed several ‘exemplary’ longleaf pine reference sites80 throughout the state of Florida to assess longleaf pine density, age and size structure. Four of these initially surveyed sites were in the path of Hurricane Michael and are the focus of the Before-After assessment in this study. FNAI selected individual sites to serve as natural community reference sites based on canopy structure, regeneration, and overall groundcover quality (https://www.fnai.org/RefNC_Playlist_map/index.html). The longleaf pine community reference sites are well managed (with active fire management), exemplary representations of their respective community types and are mostly comprised of second-growth stands of naturally occurring longleaf pine37,80.

The four sites in this study represent two different natural community types, wet flatwoods (WF) and upland pine (UP), ranging between 2 and 85 km away from the center of the storm, where it was the strongest (Fig. 1). The two WF sites were in St. Marks National Wildlife Refuge (NWR) (85 km from center of storm) and Apalachicola National Forest (NF) (35 km from center of storm). The two UP sites were in Joe Budd Wildlife Management Area (WMA) (56 km from center of storm) and Apalachee Wildlife Management Area (WMA) (2 km from center of storm). Three of the four sites were located on the eastern side of the storm while the fourth site (Apalachee WMA) was located directly within the center of the storm. We were not able to access sites on the western side post-storm.

Pre- and post-hurricane field surveys
Prior to the hurricane, sites were fortuitously surveyed in April and May of 2018 for assessing stand structure. Field surveys of tree density, life-stage, and size structure were conducted using modified variable area transects, where distances between trees and a baseline transect were used to estimate density81. A baseline transect was extended 40 meters and divided into 8 cells (4 on each side, each 10 m wide and variable in length) to make a plot. Within each cell, data on the closest 5 living trees were recorded, including GPS location, diameter at breast height (dbh), and distance to the furthest tree from the baseline transect, for a maximum of 5 trees per cell or a maximum search distance of 20 m per cell. We chose the modified variable area transects because variable-area transects allow for appropriately large sample sizes82, particularly in widely spaced longleaf pine savannas, and we used the modification by Sheil et al.81, which produces density estimates for different species, to produce density estimates for different size classes in this study. The number of plots varied from 2–5 depending on the size of the stand, to capture a representative sample of each site. Plot locations captured a representative sample of each site by equally spacing plots throughout the sites, which varied from 2.1–24.2 ha (Supplementary Table S1). Trees were classified into 4 possible size classes based on their life stage and dbh: juveniles (<15 cm dbh) and mature trees (with evidence of cone production) that were small (15–30 cm dbh), medium (30–45 cm dbh), or large (45 + cm dbh). In pre-hurricane surveys, dead trees were infrequently encountered and were not recorded because the goal of these surveys was to determine living tree density.

Post-hurricane surveys were conducted in November and December of 2018, within 3 months of the storm, using the same variable area transect methodology81. Plot placements in post-hurricane surveys were determined using GPS coordinates taken at the starting point of the original (pre-hurricane plots), using high resolution maps of pre-hurricane surveys, and following the same cardinal direction of original plots. Although plot placement matching prior surveys was not exact, the variable-area transects are designed to capture representative density estimates for the site. During post-hurricane surveys, additional information was recorded, including the status of the tree (living or dead) and any visible damage. Post-hurricane surveys were conducted two ways. First, a survey of remaining living trees was conducted for the Before-After assessment of tree density. Second, a survey of all trees (living and dead) was conducted to determine the density of dead trees as well as percent mortality. In addition to all living trees, only trees killed by the storm were included in post-hurricane surveys, determined through a visual assessment of tree decay. Trees killed by other causes were infrequently encountered and had signs of decay inconsistent with recent storm damage (e.g., significant levels of rot, no green foliage remaining, or had evidence of experiencing a fire post-mortem. There were no fires between the hurricane and our post-hurricane surveys). Living and dead trees were classified into the following damage groups: no visible damage, minor damage (such as needle loss, broken, or fallen branches), partially uprooted, uprooted, snapped, or moderate to major crown damage, for which estimated percent canopy loss was also recorded (canopy loss of >50%, >75%, or >90%). Canopy loss of 75% or greater included damage to the main stem and majority needle loss. Canopy loss of 90% included damage to the main stem and total needle loss. Trees that were partially uprooted, uprooted, or snapped or had canopy loss of >90% were considered dead. Trees with canopy loss of >90% comprised only <1% of the sample and removing them from mortality estimates do not substantially change our results.

Statistical analysis
We quantified the effects of the hurricane on tree density in two ways. First, we compared densities of living trees in pre- and post-hurricane surveys, and second, we directly estimated mortality by comparing the density of living and dead trees post-hurricane. For the former, we estimated densities of pre- and post-hurricane trees by size class using generalized linear mixed effects models, where site and the interaction between site and survey (i.e., before vs. after) were fixed parameters, the count of trees per size class per cell was the response, and sample plot within site was the random effect. The models were weighted by the area searched in each cell (following the survey design by Sheil et al.81). Plots were used as the random effect because not every size class was represented in every cell. We used generalized linear mixed models with a Poisson likelihood from the lme4 package83 in R. We estimated marginal means and confidence intervals with the emmeans package84 to determine if changes in density from pre- to -post-hurricane surveys were significant at the p < 0.05 level. Second, we used a logistic regression to estimate mean longleaf pine mortality overall and of each size class at each site. The response was the count of living trees by size class over the total number of trees (living and dead) observed per cell by size class with a categorical fixed effect capturing site number and size class, weighted by the total number of trees in each size class per cell. We generated 95% confidence intervals for mortality with a Jeffrey’s interval method85.

Hurricanes passing over the ocean can mix the water column down to great depths and resuspend massive volumes of sediments on the continental shelves. Consequently, organic carbon and reduced inorganic compounds associated with these sediments can be resuspended from anaerobic portions of the seabed and re-exposed to dissolved oxygen (DO) in the water column. This process can drive DO consumption as sediments become oxidized. Previous studies have investigated the effect of hurricanes on DO in different coastal regions of the world, highlighting the alleviation of hypoxic conditions by extreme winds, which drive vertical mixing and re-aeration of the water column. However, the effect of hurricane-induced resuspended sediments on DO has been neglected. Here, using a diverse suite of datasets for the northern Gulf of Mexico, we find that in the few days after a hurricane passage, decomposition of resuspended shelf sediments consumes up to a fifth of the DO added to the bottom of the water column during vertical mixing. Despite uncertainty in this value, we highlight the potential significance of this mechanism for DO dynamics. Overall, sediment resuspension likely occurs over all continental shelves affected by tropical cyclones, potentially impacting global cycles of marine DO and carbon.

Introduction
Hurricanes, generically known as tropical cyclones (TCs), impact many coastal regions of the world by bringing strong winds and rain to both the land and sea. These extreme meteorological conditions affect many aspects of ocean circulation and land-ocean exchange, for example, by increasing wind-induced mixing and river discharge1,2,3. These physical changes also alter biogeochemical cycles in the coastal ocean. For instance, the ventilation and consequent re-aeration of the water column induced by hurricanes on the shelf has been linked to the smaller-than-predicted sizes of the Gulf of Mexico’s summer hypoxic region, also known as the “dead zone”4,5,6. However, other TC-induced processes could enhance DO consumption in the Gulf of Mexico as well as other continental shelves. Storm-enhanced rates of erosion in river basins and along the coastline lead to higher particulate7,8,9 and dissolved10 organic carbon loading to the shelf, which can result in increased biochemical oxygen demand. In some estuarine systems, the higher freshwater discharge and organic carbon input due to hurricanes lead to hypoxic (low DO) events2,11,12,13,14,15. Furthermore, extreme precipitation events in the Mississippi River basin were shown to rapidly transport terrestrially derived dissolved organic carbon to the northern Gulf of Mexico16. As a large portion of the terrestrial organic carbon is remineralized after it reaches the coastal ocean, the region changes from a net sink to a net source of carbon dioxide to the atmosphere during these events16. This flood-enhanced remineralization could also lead to additional consumption of DO.

In addition to the above-mentioned mechanisms by which TCs may affect DO, hurricane-induced resuspension may also increase DO consumption. Hurricanes have the necessary spatial scale and intensity to control continental shelf sediment dynamics, for example in the Gulf of Mexico3,17,18,19, the North American Atlantic coast20, and other parts of the world such as the high mountainous islands of the western Pacific7,21. The strong shear stress generated by hurricane-induced currents at the bottom boundary of the shallow continental shelf can resuspend sediments from as deep as the 100 m isobath19,20 and over spatial scales of kilometers19. Many studies have documented the massive volumes of sediment resuspended, transported, and re-deposited on continental shelves by TCs in different regions of the world. For example, 1.16 1015 ± 1.56 1014 g of sediment were determined to be mobilized along the Texas/Louisiana shelf during Hurricanes Katrina and Rita in 2005, representing 10 years of sediment output by the Mississippi River18. Large volumes of sediment transport have also been directly observed or modeled during many other Hurricanes in the Gulf over the last several decades22,23, along the US Atlantic coast during Hurricanes such as Isabel24 and Sandy25, and along the Northeastern Australian coast during Cyclone Winifred26. Sediment resuspension re-exposes sedimentary organic carbon (of both marine and terrestrial origin) and dissolved reduced substances to DO, leading to extensive remineralization of these pools27,28. The latter process enhances the production of carbon dioxide and consumption of DO, especially if the remineralization continues once the water column is re-stratified after the strong mixing event. The enhancement of DO consumption due to sediment resuspension has been investigated in environments not affected by hurricanes (e.g., Gulf of Finland29, Gulf of Lion30, a Scottish fjord31, a shallow U.S. lake32), using methods that range from benthic chambers with artificial stirring29 to numerical models30. A recent modelling study has also investigated this process in the Gulf of Mexico during non-hurricane conditions33,34. Furthermore, there is evidence in the Gulf of Mexico that sediments resuspended by a short-lived weather front led to increased oxygen utilization35. Nevertheless, the effect of hurricane-induced sediment resuspension on DO concentrations has not yet been thoroughly investigated.

In the present study, we aim to further the understanding of the role of sediment resuspension by hurricanes in coastal DO dynamics. Using a suite of datasets for the northern Gulf of Mexico including remote sensing, in situ observations, and reanalysis, we separate the effects on DO concentrations of hurricane-induced vertical mixing, the Mississippi/Atchafalaya River plumes, and resuspended shelf sediments. We find that within days of the hurricanes, the consumption of DO from sediment resuspension partly compensates for the effects of vertical mixing and is a significant sink of DO. While our focus is on the northern Gulf of Mexico, we argue that this process occurs on other continental shelves affected by extreme wind events and could be important for DO and carbon budgets of the global coastal ocean.

Sediment Resuspension by Hurricanes
As a measure of sediments resuspended from the ocean floor when hurricanes pass through the shelf, we used weekly satellite-derived Total Suspended Matter (TSM) concentrations (see Methods). For instance, a map of TSM for the Gulf of Mexico showed high concentrations the week Hurricane Rita made landfall (24 September 2005; Fig. 1a); TSM was highest landward of the 50 m isobath over the shelves of Texas, Louisiana, and Mississippi. In order to explore the spatial extent of potential hurricane-induced resuspension in the Gulf of Mexico, we developed a proxy for resuspension using a mixing length (L) associated with TC-induced wind forcing36 and the bathymetric depth (h). Resuspension would occur if L/h > 1, i.e. if the mixing generated by the hurricane reached the seafloor. Using available hurricane tracks from the HURDAT2 dataset and the corresponding density profiles at the location of each track from 1985 to 2010 from the Simple Ocean Data Assimilation (SODA) ocean reanalysis, we calculated L (eq. 1 in Balaguru et al.; more details about the equation, HURDAT2 and SODA in Methods) and then divided it by the bathymetry37. Values of L/h were usually above 1 in regions shallower than 50 m (Fig. 1b; although some studies suggest resuspension may occur up to 100 m depth during very strong storms19,24). For the locations of hurricane tracks within the 50 m isobath (Fig. 2a), we found the corresponding TSM for the week of the hurricanes, a week before the hurricanes, and up to two weeks after (more details in Methods). With these TSM values, we averaged the available data in each hurricane-referenced week and created a composite of TSM for the shelf region (depth < 50 m) of the Gulf of Mexico (Fig. 2b). A large increase in surface TSM (2.4 g/m3 or 53%) occurred the week of the hurricanes (“week 0”); during the following week (“week 1”), TSM further increased by an additional 42% (1.9 g/m3). By the subsequent week (“week 2”), TSM concentrations declined due to settling and nearly approached their pre-storm concentrations.

Figure 1
figure1
Maps of sediment resuspension. (a) Weekly total suspended matter (TSM) at surface in the Gulf of Mexico for the week in which Hurricane Rita made landfall (22 to 29 September 2005) and Rita’s track (numbers indicate day of September at midnight). (b) Proxy for sediment resuspension, L/h, where h is the bathymetry and L is the mixing scale calculated for hurricanes (wind speed > 32 m/s). The 50, 100, and 200 m isobaths are shown as gray contours in both panels. Maps were created using MATLAB (R2014a).

Full size image
Figure 2
figure2
Total Suspended Matter (TSM), rain, and surface salinity composites. (a) Location of hurricane tracks in the northwestern Gulf of Mexico used to compute the TSM composites (black circles) and location of the station used to calculate the rain and salinity composites (red triangle). Map was created using MATLAB (R2014a). (b) Composite of weekly TSM (g/m3) from a week before to two weeks after the hurricanes. (c) Composite of daily rainfall (mm/d) and (d) sea surface salinity (SSS) from 2 days before to 14 days after the hurricanes. ΔSSS is shown by subtracting to SSS the value at day −2. Error bars in each composite show standard error.

Full size image
There are two main sources of surface TSM over the shelf during or after a hurricane: the sediments resuspended from the seafloor by hurricane-generated bottom shear38,39 and the additional suspended matter carried into the region by freshwater discharge from the Mississippi/Atchafalaya river system and several smaller rivers along the coastline (all of the above may integrate additional TSM from the erosion of wetlands). In order to distinguish between the timing and magnitude of these two sediment sources in our TSM composite, we analyzed the rain and sea surface salinity (SSS) signatures near the mouth of the Mississippi River at 29°N and 90°W (red triangle in Fig. 2a; see details on rain and SSS data in Methods). For example, SSS and rainfall in late summer/early fall 2005 showed two freshening events after each of the hurricanes Katrina and Rita: the first one was an immediate response to rainfall and the second lagged for ~5–7 days, indicating the arrival of the river plume (Supplementary Fig. S1). To generalize these findings to all hurricanes, we followed a similar approach as for TSM and created composites of SSS and rainfall from two days before the arrival of hurricanes to 14 days after (Fig. 2c for rainfall and Fig. 2d for ΔSSS, which is SSS minus SSS two days before the hurricanes). This analysis showed a mean decrease in SSS around day 0, followed by a second freshening around days 9 and 10 after the hurricanes (Fig. 2d), consistent with our findings for Hurricane Katrina and Rita (Fig. S1). Given the large amount of precipitation during the hurricanes relative to the change in SSS (Fig. 2c), as well as analysis of Mississippi River hydrographs during several Gulf of Mexico storms showing that the typical residence time of freshwater in the watershed and lower River is ~2 weeks (see Supplementary Material and Fig. S2), we assumed that rainfall and shelf processes (rather than changes in riverine input) primarily drove changes in SSS and surface TSM within the first 5–7 days after the storms. In contrast, the second instance of freshening was likely due to the re-establishment of the river plume following the storm (to a lesser extent, rainfall on the shelf may also have contributed to the second decrease in salinity). Based on the above and given that the ΔSSS composites represent an average response of SSS to hurricanes at a location close to the Mississippi River mouth (i.e., the plume will take longer to arrive to the northwestern shelf, even if winds and other factors affect the plume location), we assumed that riverine delivery has minimal effect on the shelf TSM in surface waters within the first ~5–7 days after the storms.

Connection Between DO and Resuspended Sediments
While surface sediment concentrations do not equal (and likely underestimate) near-bed concentrations, the resuspension-induced signal in surface TSM implies that sediment concentrations increase throughout the water column, including near the bed. The aerobic remineralization of the organic carbon in these near-bed sediments could represent a significant DO sink for bottom waters. In order to investigate changes in bottom DO due to hurricane-induced sediment resuspension, we used an extensive dataset of in situ DO observations in the northwestern Gulf of Mexico (see Methods and Supplementary Material). We selected stations located at depths shallower than 50 m, within 200 km of a hurricane track, and within three different time periods relative to the hurricane: 2 weeks before, 0 to 5 days after, and 5 to 15 days after the hurricane (note that no observations were available in the 5 days right before and 2 days right after hurricanes). The probability distribution functions of hypoxic waters (DO ≤ 1.4 mL/L) show how hypoxia decreased considerably right after the hurricane and rebounded back to previous conditions shortly after (Fig. 3a), which is consistent with previous studies4,5,40. These studies focused on the role of water column re-aeration to explain the decrease in hypoxia shortly after the hurricanes. Given the observed increase in surface TSM during the week of the hurricane (which we linked to sediment resuspension affecting the whole water column), here we propose instead that two main processes were at play between the pre-storm and the post-storm (0 to 5 days after hurricanes) conditions: (1) the DO replenishment due to mixing/ventilation of the water column; and (2) the DO consumption by the remineralization of resuspended sediments (which are mostly composed of terrigenous clay and silt in the region of our DO observations41, with an organic content of up to 4.4%35). The latter process was also aided by some re-stratification, which reduced the DO supply to the bottom waters and concentrated the resuspended organic matter in a smaller volume; re-stratification was likely due to post-storm solar heating, flow from small, flashy rivers and an initial pulse from the lower Mississippi/Atchafalaya system.

Figure 3
figure3
Analysis of in situ dissolved oxygen (DO) data. (a) Probability distribution function of hypoxia (DO ≤ 1.4 mL/L) for three periods: 2 weeks before, 0 to 5 days after, and 5 to 15 days after hurricanes (error bars show standard deviations and each column shows sample sizes). (b) Bottom DO vs. stratification (Δρ/Δz) for the pre-storm (open black circles) and 0 to 5 days post-storm (filled gray diamonds) periods. Regression lines are shown for each period. (c) Schematic for 2-step DO analysis. Red and blue circles indicate the mean DO conditions pre- and post-hurricane, respectively. Arrows show the changes in DO due to complete homogenization (ΔDOventilation, red arrow) and the combination of restratification and remineralization of resuspended sediments (ΔDOsedim+restrat, blue arrow). Horizontal dotted lines highlight the values of bottom DO for the pre-storm, post-storm, and fully-homogenized conditions.

Full size image
In order to distinguish between the two proposed processes, we analyzed bottom DO concentrations (DOb) vs. stratification for the two periods (Fig. 3b). Previous studies showed that the strength of vertical stratification is an important predictor of DOb in the Gulf of Mexico40,42. However, the effect of stratification on DOb may increase as the rate of DO consumption is enhanced, e.g. due to the availability of additional organic matter. As a measure of stratification, we used the difference in density between bottom and surface samples divided by depth: Δρ/Δz = (ρbottom − ρsurface)/h. We chose to regress DOb as function of Δρ/Δz with an ordinary least square fit (see Methods); nevertheless, the use of other regression methods did not affect our final conclusions significantly (see Supplementary Material and Table S1). We found that DOb had statistically different (p < 0.0001) regressions for the pre- and post-hurricane periods:

DOpreb=−3.77⋅(Δρ/Δz)pre+2.6
(1)
DOpostb=−7.49⋅(Δρ/Δz)post+4.2
(2)
where Δρ/Δz and DOb have units of kg/m4 and mL/L, respectively (see more details on these equations in Methods). Overall, the slope for the post-storm period (−7.49 ± 0.55) was steeper than for the pre-storm conditions (−3.77 ± 0.73). Assuming that lateral fluxes of DO are small (see Supplementary Material), the change in slope indicates an enhancement in DO depletion right after the hurricanes; more precisely, the almost doubling of the regression slope indicates that DO depletion about doubled (99% higher, because 7.49/3.77 = 1.99 ± 0.08) in the days after the storm, compared to pre-storm conditions. We suggest that this is due to the resuspended sediments in the water column and the associated increase in the remineralization of their organic content.

To quantify the role of remineralization of resuspended sediments vs. that of ventilation of the water column, we considered DO dynamics during the passage of a hurricane that completely homogenizes the water column. This assumption of vertical homogenization was justified by analyzing HYCOM data before and after hurricanes, which showed that hurricanes mostly homogenized the water column in the shallow continental shelf regions of the northern Gulf of Mexico (see Supplementary Material and Fig. S5). For this analysis, we propose that the effect of mixing/ventilation in DOb may be represented by the changes in stratification following equation (1), while equation (2) reflects the combined effect of re-stratification and resuspension. When assuming complete homogenization, the change in DOb due only to ventilation (ΔDOventilation) could be calculated as the difference between equation (1) applied to a) Δρ/Δz = 0 (homogenized water column) and b) the mean stratification for the pre-storm period (Δρ/Δz = 0.33 kg/m4; note that DObpre(Δρ/Δz = 0.33) = 1.4 mL/L is equivalent to the observed mean DOb concentration for the pre-storm period). The result is ΔDOventilation = 2.6–1.4 = 1.2 ± 0.2 mL/L (see red arrow in Fig. 3c and detailed calculations in Supplementary Material). After complete homogenization of the water column, the remineralization of resuspended sediments and the associated increase in DO consumption, as well as the reduction in DO supply due to re-stratification, decreased DOb concentrations and led to the observed mean DObp°st of 2.1 mL/L (equivalent to equation (2) applied to the mean post-storm stratification, Δρ/Δz = 0.28 kg/m4). Therefore, the mean combined effect of sediment remineralization and re-stratification would be the difference between DObpre at homogeneous conditions (2.6 mL/L) and mean DObp°st (2.1 mL/L), yielding ΔDOsedim+restrat = −0.5 ± 0.4 mL/L (blue arrow in Fig. 3c). The combination of ΔDOventilation and ΔDOsedim+restrat (1.2 mL/L – 0.5 mL/L = 0.7 mL/L) accounts for the difference between the observed mean DObpre and DObp°st (i.e., 1.4 mL/L vs. 2.1 mL/L, respectively). Hence, by assuming an intermediate step with a completely homogenized water column, the combined effect of sediment remineralization and re-stratification represented 42% of the effect of re-aeration (0.5/1.2 = 0.42 ± 0.31). Here, we assumed a linear combination of both processes (i.e., ventilation and the combination of remineralization and re-stratification) because hurricane-induced vertical mixing is almost instantaneous compared with sediment remineralization and re-stratification. This 42% represents an upper limit for the role of resuspended sediments and re-stratification on bottom DO concentrations, because hurricanes may not necessarily homogenize the whole water column. However, our analysis of HYCOM data (see Supplementary Material) indicates that hurricanes (and even tropical storms) are typically able to create near-homogenous conditions in the water column. Furthermore, model results also suggest that remineralization of resuspended particulate organic matter (POM) is the major contributor to the storm-induced increase in DO consumption rate during and following Hurricane Humberto in 2007 (see Supplementary Material), consistent with Gulf of Mexico modeling results for smaller storms33,34.

We assumed that ΔDOsedim+restrat is a linear combination of its “sediment-only” and “restratification-only” components due to the different time scales of remineralization and restratification (slow vs. fast, respectively). Revisiting the concept that the availability of resuspended sediments increases DOb consumption by 99% for any given change in stratification, we then have ΔDOsedim+restrat = ΔDOsedim + ΔDOrestrat = 1.99 ΔDOrestrat. Therefore, using the upper bound ΔDOsedim+restrat = 0.42 ΔDOventilation, we calculated that the effect in bottom DO by the remineralization of resuspended sediments (ΔDOsedim) represents up to 21 ± 15% of the re-aeration of the water column. Analogously, the re-stratification after the hurricane-induced mixing (ΔDOrestrat) also represents up to a 21 ± 16% of the re-aeration. This result was consistent with estimates made using other linear regression techniques (e.g. ΔDOsedim was a 12 ± 3% and 16 ± 6% of ΔDOventilation with two model II regressions, see Supplementary Material and Table S1).

There is high uncertainty in the above calculations (~±16%), but alternative methods of estimating the effects of resuspended organic matter on DO support our conclusion, as shown below. The uncertainty is due to the large scatter in the pre-hurricane dataset and the limited number of observations immediately post-hurricanes. Additional errors arise from using observations from different storms and different sampling locations for the pre- and post- storm observations. Eventually, future sampling programs should be able to reduce this uncertainty through measurements made closely before and after hurricanes; in the meantime, we offer results from a numerical model and an alternative back-of-the-envelope calculation to further support our results. For the latter, we aim to estimate how much DO would be consumed by the remineralization of the TSM that represents hurricane-resuspended sediments in our composite (6.85 g/m3 at week 0, Fig. 2b), keeping in mind that this surface TSM likely underestimates the near-bed sediment concentrations. To transform TSM into organic carbon (OC) units, we use two different OC content values from the Louisiana Shelf 35: 4.4%OC measured for TSM in the nepheloid layer and 1.4%OC from seabed samples (the surface TSM measured by satellite should have an intermediate %OC, since hurricanes will bring up to the surface both deposited sediments and sediments already in suspension in the nepheloid layer). Using these values and considering a ratio of oxygen utilization to organic carbon consumption of 1.335, the DO sink from the remineralization of the hurricane-resuspended surface TSM would range between 0.09 and 0.28 mL/L. This rough calculation is in reasonable agreement with our estimation of DOb consumed by resuspended sediments (ΔDOsedim = 0.21 × ΔDOventilation = 0.21 × 1.2 mL/L = 0.25 mL/L). Furthermore, results from a numerical model for the Gulf of Mexico suggest that decomposition of resuspended sediments could account for an even greater proportion of re-aeration (e.g. 56% in the bottom water column during Hurricane Humberto in 2007, see Supplementary Material).

Previous studies noted that the alleviation of hypoxia by hurricanes depends on many factors4,43, including the timing of the storms. For example, conditions in early summer, when wind stress decreases after the winter period44 and freshwater volume on the Texas – Louisiana shelf is high45, would allow for stratification and hypoxia to re-establish more easily after a hurricane. In contrast, several factors would affect the re-establishment of stratification and hypoxia after TCs later in the summer, e.g. the increased frequency of autumn/winter storms43, the reduced availability of freshwater over the shelf45, and the decreased availability of labile POM (which would lower DO consumption)46,47. Our results indicate that, on average and when considering as many hurricanes as we could match with our DO dataset (see Methods), hypoxia 5 to 15 days after a hurricane returned to the pre-storm levels (Fig. 3a). This re-establishment of hypoxia co-occurred with the arrival of the hurricane-enhanced river plume, the reappearance of strong stratification, and the further increase in TSM in the week after the hurricanes. Furthermore, the organic matter brought by the river plume is likely fresher than in shelf sediments, which have already undergone substantial oxic breakdown48. Further analysis of the available data for the 5–15 day period after hurricanes is given in the Supplementary Material.

Implications of Sediment Resuspension by Hurricanes
While the ventilation and re-aeration of the water column is the dominant effect in bottom DO concentrations during or shortly after the passage of a hurricane in the northern Gulf of Mexico, here we show that the oxidation of organic matter associated with resuspended sediments partly opposes the effects of ventilation. This process has previously been neglected in the analysis of how hurricanes affect oxygen levels, but it provides a DO sink that weakens the alleviation of low DO conditions by wind-induced mixing. Previous studies have found that resuspension can decrease DO during non-hurricane conditions29,49,50; for instance, a recent modeling study showed that sediment resuspension increased DO consumption up to 8 times offshore of the Rhône River Estuary30. To the best of our knowledge, our work represents the first attempt at quantifying the role of hurricane-induced sediment resuspension in coastal DO dynamics.

Although the limited availability of observations creates uncertainty in our results, this work highlights the potential significance of the proposed mechanism. Future sampling programs aimed at measuring water column properties closely before and after TCs would reduce the uncertainty in our current estimates. Furthermore, targeted observations and numerical models may be able to address other processes that we could not resolve with our dataset, such as horizontal advection. For instance, model results show that the dominant drivers of DO during and shortly after Hurricane Humberto (2007) were vertical mixing/advection and the decomposition of hurricane-induced resuspended sediments, rather than horizontal advection (see Supplementary Material). Another process unaccounted for by our dataset is the enhancement of aerobic remineralization rates by the overall increase of DO by re-aeration; nevertheless, model results show that the role of this enhancement is minor compared to sediment resuspension33,34.

The Gulf of Mexico has the distinctive feature of a large river plume, but not every region affected by TCs counts with a major river. The effect of the Mississippi/Atchafalaya river plume was crucial for the re-establishment of hypoxia in the Texas – Louisiana shelf in our second post-storm period (5–15 days after the hurricanes); we could expect the increase of low DO waters following storms to be slower in shelf regions affected by hurricanes but unaffected by large river plumes. From a global perspective, only 15% (1.3 × 106 km2) of the total shelf area affected by TCs in the world (8.5 × 106 km2 of shelves shallower than 200 m) is impacted by major rivers (see Methods). In contrast, resuspension of previously accumulated sediments occurs over every shelf and coastal region affected by storms24, even in regions without large river systems51 (see Supplementary Fig. S10 for an example of high TSM after a hurricane on the Florida shelf). Furthermore, non-deltaic sediments often contain about double the organic carbon than deltaic sediments52, potentially amplifying DO drawdown because their bacterial breakdown consumes more DO. In some shallow estuarine systems where hypoxia developed shortly after the impact of hurricanes (attributed to the higher discharge and freshwater loading2,11,12,13,14,15), resuspended sediments could have also partly contributed to the drawdown of DO. In summary, the effect of DO consumption by the decomposition of resuspended sediments would be ubiquitous and could potentially have a role in global coastal DO and carbon dynamics. Moreover, the effect could be relatively more important in maintaining low DO values in shelf areas without large river plumes.

Besides furthering the understanding of DO dynamics in coastal regions affected by TCs, the role of sediment resuspension could have implications for model-based calculations of DO budgets. Many large-scale global and regional ocean models do not consider sediments explicitly42,53,54,55,56 and thus, ignore sediment resuspension as a mechanism affecting DO dynamics. Therefore, their budgets could be overestimating the re-oxygenation due to TCs as well as smaller ventilation events. Furthermore, given the tight connection between DO and carbon cycles, our results strengthen previous suggestions that sediment resuspension by TCs may have a quantitatively significant impact on coastal carbon cycling28,57.

The long-term DO decline observed in the global ocean is of concern58,59,60 due to the expected and potential negative effects to marine ecosystems, greenhouse gas emissions (particularly N2O), and consequently, to society. Hurricanes are traditionally expected to re-oxygenate the water column in the coastal ocean; however, here we described a TC-related mechanism that would partly counteract this re-aeration on continental shelves. As hurricane intensity is expected to increase under future climates61,62, it remains unclear whether the mechanism proposed here would increase or decrease its relative importance with respect to wind-induced ventilation. The relative role will depend, at least partly, on whether more sediments can be resuspended under stronger or more frequent hurricanes and whether ventilation would also decrease due to the effect of warmer future conditions in DO solubility. Overall, this study emphasizes the importance of efforts to understand the role of extreme events on ocean biogeochemistry, as the frequency and intensity of events such as hurricanes, floods, drought, etc. may change in the future.

Methods
Hurricane data and mixing length
Hurricane track data were obtained from the National Hurricane Center’s HURDAT2 database63 (www.nhc.noaa.gov/data/#hurdat) to calculate the composite mean sediment and sea surface salinity response to hurricanes, hurricane rainfall composite, and the hurricane mixing length (L). To compute the latter, we used a turbulent kinetic energy approach that considers the balance between work done by the wind at the surface and the potential energy barrier created by ocean stratification64; therefore, L is estimated based on the hurricane’s intensity, its forward moving speed, and the upper-ocean stratification beneath the storm36. This stratification was calculated from the Simple Ocean Data Assimilation (SODA) ocean reanalysis65, using 5-day mean, sub-surface temperature and salinity data at a spatial resolution of 0.5 degrees (obtained from www.atmos.umd.edu/~ocean/).

Total suspended matter data
Weekly total suspended matter (TSM) from April 2002 to April 2012 at 4 km spatial resolution was obtained from the European Space Agency’s GlobColour Project66,67 (www.globcolour.info); these data have been developed, validated, and distributed by ACRI-ST, France. TSM is given in units of grams per cubic meter and is a measure of the turbidity of the water. It uses the MERIS C2R Neural Network algorithm68 and is computed from the back-scattering coefficient at 444 nm. The product is valid for case 2 waters, i.e. waters where inorganic particles dominate over phytoplankton (typically in coastal waters).

To compute the composites, we first found the hurricane tracks available in the Northern Gulf of Mexico (north of 28°N) within the 50 m isobath. Then, for each track we found all the weekly TSM data available within 2 degrees of the track location and with depths ≤ 50 m, which approximately represents the median radius of Atlantic hurricanes69. We assigned the name “week 0” to all the weeks of TSM data in which a hurricane track occurred within the first 5 days of the week, in order to assure that the response to the hurricane was captured by that week’s data. Weeks prior to or after “week 0” were indicated with negative or positive numbers (e.g., “week −1”, “week 1”). Finally, the data available for all hurricanes was averaged across weeks, creating the TSM composite (Fig. 3b).

Rain and sea surface salinity data
Daily satellite precipitation data from NASA’s Tropical Rainfall Measuring Mission70 (https://pmm.nasa.gov/trmm) was obtained for the period 1995–2011 at a location near the mouth of the Mississippi River (90°W and 29°N). To compute the rainfall composite, we found each hurricane passing within 200 km of that location, finding all precipitation values from 2 days prior to the storm’s arrival to 14 days after the day of the storm. The composite was created by averaging the rainfall obtained for 7 hurricanes at each of those 17 days. The same procedure was followed to create the ΔSSS composites, using SSS at 90°W and 29°N from the 1998–2015 data-assimilative HYbrid Coordinate Ocean Model (HYCOM) Global Ocean Forecasting System 3.1 (https://hycom.org/)71 and removing the value of SSS two days before the hurricane to the time series to create ΔSSS. The standard error for ΔSSS is larger than for rain (error bars in Fig. 2d and c, respectively), because the changes in SSS due to precipitation are small compared with the seasonal cycle.

Dissolved oxygen data
DO observations belong to the World Ocean Database 2009 (WOD09)72,73, the Mechanisms Controlling Hypoxia (MCH) program, and other published sources4,6,74,75,76,77. The whole dataset counted observations from 1933 to 2011, from which we selected stations that satisfied three criteria:

Water depth shallower than or equal to 50 m, since TCs mostly resuspend sediments at these depths according to our L/h criteria (Fig. 1b).

Location within 200 km of a hurricane track from the HURDAT2 dataset (as mentioned before, this distance represents the radius of influence of hurricanes in the Gulf of Mexico69).

Timestamp within three different periods relative to a hurricane track: between 1 and 14 days before, between 0 and 5 days after, or between 5 and 15 days after.

The locations of selected stations as well as their corresponding DO histograms are shown in the Supplementary Material (Fig. S6). For the pre-hurricane period, we obtained 48 DO profiles that occurred before three hurricanes: Andrew (1992), Lili (2002), and Katrina (2005). None of these profiles were sampled in the 5 days right before the hurricanes; furthermore, only data for Katrina was available within 10 days of the storm (hence, our extension to 14 days in order to capture two more hurricanes). For the period 0–5 days after hurricanes, we had 7 profiles measured between 2 and 4 days after hurricanes Danny (1997) and Cindy (2005). Note that while observations from the before and 0–5 days after periods belong to different hurricanes, environmental conditions were typical of summer in all cases (i.e., pre- and post-storm profiles showed conditions within the range of observations unaffected by hurricanes at the same locations). Lastly, for the period 5–15 days after, we found 97 stations for 8 hurricanes: Babe (1977), Bonnie (1986), Andrew (1992), Danny (1997), Lili (2002), Cindy (2005), Katrina (2005), and Rita (2005). However, given that the spatial coverage for this period was so much broader than for the other two periods, we spatially subsampled these data to represent the same spatial area as the dataset for the period 0–5 days after the hurricanes. The subsampled dataset counts with 36 DO profiles matched for 6 hurricanes (same as for the full dataset except for hurricanes Babe and Rita).

The regressions in equations (1) and (2) were fitted with ordinary least squares (even if the independent variable Δρ/Δz likely has error associated to it), because the relationship between the two variables is expected to be asymmetric78, i.e. stratification is the proposed driver of DOb, while the opposite is not true. Nevertheless, the results using two other least square fits that do assume error in the “x” variable do not alter our main conclusions and are shown in the Supplementary Material and Table S1. To evaluate the calculated regressions between bottom DO and stratification in equations (1) and (2), we tested the null hypothesis on the Pearson product-moment correlation coefficient (R) with a t-test. For equation (1), R = −0.60 (R2 = 0.37), N = 48, t = −5.2 and degrees of freedom = 46. For equation (2), R = −0.99 (R2 = 0.97), N = 7, t = −13.6 and degrees of freedom = 5. Therefore, both R values were significant at more than 99% (p < 0.0001); note that the high R2 in equation (2) is due to regressing observations from only two cruises. We applied the Fisher r-to-z transformation to assess the significance of the difference between both R values; the result provided z = 3.46 and a difference significant at more than 99% (for either the one- or two-tailed cases, with p = 0.0001 and 0.0002, respectively). In addition, we tested that the slopes of both equations (−3.77 and −7.49 for equations (1) and (2), respectively) were significantly different at more than 99% confidence (p < 0.0001, t = 15.9 and degrees of freedom = 51). Lastly, given the large difference in sample size between both datasets, we used a Monte Carlo approach to estimate that the probability of having a regression slope similar to the one of the 0–5 day period (−7.49, equation 2) given a subsample of the pre-storm dataset was ~10% (Supplementary Material and Fig. S8).

World shelf areas under TC influence
Using bathymetric data at a 1/4 degree resolution37, we calculated the total shelf area (depths less than 200 m) affected by TCs to be 8.5 × 106 km2 (areas influenced by TCs taken from a previous study79). We tested and confirmed our calculation approach by comparing the global shelf area we obtained (27.9 × 106 km2) with other estimates (26.2 × 106 km2 and 27.7 × 106 km2)80,81. To calculate the total area of river plumes in regions affected by TCs, we used data published in Table 3 of Kang et al.80. We considered the six major river systems in TC-affected regions: Mississippi, Orinoco, Ganges and Brahmaputra, Irrawaddy and Salween, Yangtze and Pearl. Averaging the river plume area during the six months of the TC-season for each of these six systems, the total combined plume area was 1.3 × 106 km2. The latter represented a 15.3% of the total area of shelves affected by TC (8.5 × 106 km2). Both areas were calculated using the 200 m isobaths as reference, but we could argue that using 50 m for both calculations would likely maintain the same relative relationship of 15%.

Data Availability
The datasets generated during and/or analysed during the current study are available from the corresponding author on reasonable request.

Projected increases in cyclonic storm intensity under a warming climate will have profound effects on forests, potentially changing these ecosystems from carbon sinks to sources. Forecasting storm impacts on these ecosystems requires consideration of risk factors associated with storm meteorology, landscape structure, and forest attributes. Here we evaluate risk factors associated with damage severity caused by Hurricanes María and Irma across Puerto Rican forests. Using field and remote sensing data, total forest aboveground biomass (AGB) lost to the storms was estimated at 10.44 (±2.33) Tg, ca. 23% of island-wide pre-hurricane forest AGB. Storm-related rainfall was a stronger predictor of forest damage than maximum wind speeds. Soil water storage capacity was also an important risk factor, corroborating the influence of rainfall on forest damage. Expected increases of 20% in hurricane-associated rainfall in the North Atlantic highlight the need to consider how such shifts, together with high speed winds, will affect terrestrial ecosystems.

Introduction
Cyclonic storms (hurricanes, typhoons, and cyclones) represent the dominant natural disturbance for many coastal forests1,2,3,4. Multiple lines of evidence indicate that atmospheric warming will lead to more intense tropical cyclones5. Sea surface temperature increases in most regions of tropical cyclone formation suggest that maximum wind speeds will rise and storms are likely to intensify more rapidly6. Anthropogenic warming will also lead to higher atmosphere moisture content and increases in tropical-cyclone rainfall rates6,7,8,9. Increases in the intensity and frequency of tropical cyclones may reduce the ability of tropical forests to sequester carbon10.

Tropical forests account for ~70% of the gross carbon sink in the world forests (~4.0 Pg C year−1)11. Although land use change is the predominant driver of change in the tropical forest carbon sink, natural disturbance (e.g., fires, cyclonic storms) can also have important effects10,12. Models and empirical evidence agree that ecosystems are generally carbon sources immediately following disturbance, but are likely to shift to carbon sinks as vegetation recovers10,13,14. Forecasting the impacts of a greater number of more severe storms on the ability of tropical forests to act as a carbon sink requires consideration of myriad risk factors that determine the magnitude of storm impacts on vegetation across landscapes.

Observational and modelling studies suggest that forests growing at high elevations or on windward slopes are more exposed to high wind speeds, and experience greater damage and tree mortality from severe storms1,15,16,17,18. Associations between topography and tree damage may also be mediated by geology and soil characteristics19. Restricted root growth of trees growing on ridges, in shallow soils, or soils with poor drainage, may make trees more vulnerable to wind-throw and stem break1,15,16, particularly when extreme winds are accompanied by large amounts of rainfall and flooding20. Forest stand attributes are also significant predictors of tree damage and mortality as tall forests and dense canopies are generally more susceptible to wind damage1,21,22.

Detecting landscape scale effects of cyclonic storms causing forest damage is difficult using a field sampling approach. Extreme wind speeds are highly patchy23,24, and the effect of large-scale factors, such as spatial variation in storm meteorology and landscape heterogeneity on tree damage and mortality are difficult to detect. When based on field plot observations, assessments may miss up to 17% of mortality25 and small field plot studies lack the statistical power needed to assess drivers of vegetation damage26,27. Remote sensing approaches allow estimation of forest damage across large areas and identification of risk factors that lead to spatial heterogeneity in storm impacts.

On September 6, 2017 Hurricane Irma passed roughly 100 km off the northeast coast of Puerto Rico bringing over 300 mm of rain to some parts of the island, but generally there was little damage to the forests. Two weeks later, on September 20, 2017, Hurricane María caused widespread damage to forests when it made landfall on the island with maximum sustained wind speeds as high as 210 km hr−1 and in some areas, nearly 1,500 mm of storm-related rainfall over 48 hours (Supplementary Fig. S1).

Here, we combine field observations and data from remotely-sensed images to estimate total aboveground biomass (AGB) lost to Hurricanes Irma and María in Puerto Rican forests. We then examined the importance of meteorological, landscape, and forest stand-level risk factors that influenced spatial heterogeneity in forest damage. Forest damage (proportion of aboveground biomass lost) was quantified using 25 forest inventory plots from mature, old-growth forests distributed across Puerto Rico (Fig. 1, Supplementary Table S1). Field damage estimates were used to calibrate a remotely sensed index of damage derived from cloud-free composites of Sentinel-228 top-of-atmosphere reflectance image that show the fractional change in non-photosynthetic vegetation (ΔNPV) over time across Puerto Rico (312,319 ha study area). To control for forest seasonal phenology, the images used were collected the year before Hurricanes Irma and María (September 15-November 1, 2016) and soon after the two hurricanes (September 21-November 1, 2017). This method (ΔNPV) uses spectral unmixing to determine the change in NPV (i.e., woody tree stems and branches) visible from the satellite. Such change is a reasonable indicator of forest damage from cyclonic storms and wind disturbance29,30,31,32. We evaluated the relative importance of meteorological, landscape, and stand-level risk factors for forest damage using a random forest model33. Meteorological risk factors include two-week antecedent rainfall prior to Hurricane María (including that from Hurricane Irma), Hurricane María maximum sustained one-minute winds speeds, and total Hurricane María-related rainfall. Landscape risk factors included topographic indices (i.e. slope, curvature, and wind exposure to Hurricane María), surface-level geological substrate, and soil water storage. Canopy height was used to assess the impact of forest stand structure on damage.

Figure 1
figure1
Fractional change in non-photosynthetic vegetation (ΔNPV) in forested areas of Puerto Rico caused by Hurricanes Irma and María in September 2017. Blue colours indicate absence of damage, including re-greening, while tan to dark red colours indicate damage. A value of 0–0.05 (i.e. light blue) indicates little or no change from the year before the storms (September 15 – November 1, 2016) to after the storms (September 21-November 1, 2017). Black circles indicate locations of field plots measured for this study. The additional inset panel shows the locations of the plots clustered within the boundaries of El Yunque National Forest. Clustered plots include subsections of the Luquillo Forest Dynamics Plot, all subsections of a forest succession plot, all elevation gradient plots, and two climate gradient plots (Supplementary Table S1). Non-forested areas and forested areas not included in the study area due to cloud cover for the study period are shown in grey. ΔNPV was generated from Sentinel-2 TOA imagery28 in Google Earth Engine74 and visualized using ESRI ArcGIS software (version 10.5 https://desktop.arcgis.com/en/arcmap/).

Full size image
Results
Field damage assessment and landscape aboveground biomass (AGB) estimation
Forest damage quantified using ΔNPV was highly variable across the 312,319-ha study area (Fig. 1), although nearly all (ca. 92%) pixels experienced some degree of damage (Supplementary Fig. S2). Values of ΔNPV were positively associated with all field-plot based estimates of damage (Supplementary Fig. S3). Among the plot damage metrics considered, the proportion of aboveground biomass (AGB) lost to the storm had a strong relationship with ΔNPV (R2 = 0.58) (Fig. 2). Total pre-hurricane AGB for the study area was 45.87 Tg (95% CI = 33.29, 65.27) and an estimated 23% of standing pre-storm AGB was lost to the storms in forests across the island (10.44 Tg, CI = 8.11, 12.77). This damage translated to a total loss of 5.22 Tg (CI = 4.06, 6.38) of carbon from broken, uprooted, and dead stems, as well as estimated tree-level branch and leaf loss of standing stems (Fig. 3).

Figure 2
figure2
Results from the linear regression between the change in non-photosynthetic vegetation (ΔNPV) and the proportion of aboveground biomass (AGB, Mg ha−1) lost as a result of Hurricanes María and Irma, as estimated from the 25 field plots. As a negative ΔNPV value indicates regreening after the hurricanes and no field plots displayed negative ΔNPV values, the figure x-axis (ΔNPV) lower limit was set to zero for plotting purposes. Grey areas indicate 95% confidence intervals for the slope. AGB lost was estimated by including the stem-level AGB for all stems broken, uprooted, or presumed dead, as well as the estimated branch AGB lost based on canopy surveys. All leaf AGB was considered lost (see Supplementary Information for alternative AGB loss estimates).

Full size image
Figure 3
figure3
Estimated AGB lost as a result of Hurricanes Irma and María. AGB loss (Mg ha−1) estimates were calculated by multiplying the estimated proportion of AGB lost to the hurricanes (Fig. 2) by the estimated pre-hurricane AGB (Supplementary Fig S8). Estimates for AGB were calculated using a regression between field inventory data and area-weighted LiDAR-derived canopy height for field plots. Estimated AGB loss is shown in colours from blue to red, representing low to high values of damage, respectively. Three insets are shown to highlight the variation in damage patterns around the island. Areas with no data are shown in grey. This figure was generated using Sentinel-2 imagery28 in Google Earth Engine74, canopy height derived from USGS 3DEP and field plots and visualized using ESRI ArcGIS software (version 10.5 https://desktop.arcgis.com/en/arcmap/).

Full size image
Since we considered all stem-level AGB of broken trees to be lost as a result of the hurricanes, our evaluation overestimates the proportion of pre-storm AGB lost in the field. A complementary, more conservative analysis using 19 plots for which we had information for height to break estimated 20.73% AGB loss at the plot level, 9.67% less than the 30.40% estimated AGB lost for the same 19 plots using our current method. Analyses using the conservative calculations in these 19 plots instead of using the non-conservative estimations in all 25 plots yield an island-level loss of 8.11 (CI = 5.86, 10.37) Tg instead of 10.44 Tg. This difference in estimates indicates that our non-conservative approach may overestimate AGB loss by as much as 2.33 Tg AGB across the study area, approximately 5% of total pre-storm AGB (Supplementary Fig S4).

Risk factor importance
Storm meteorological characteristics, landscape structure, and forest stand-level factors all influenced spatial heterogeneity of damage (Fig. 4). Together, these factors accounted for 51% of the observed variation in ΔNPV across the island’s forests. Pairwise correlations between risk factors was generally low, with moderate correlation between Hurricane María storm-related rainfall total and maximum sustained wind speeds for sample locations in this study (Pearson’s r = 0.43, n = 18,903, Supplementary Fig. S1, S5). Risk factor importance was calculated (i) as the impact on the model MSE after randomly permuting each risk factor (i.e. variable importance, VIMP) (Fig. 4a) and (ii) by averaging the depth of the first regression tree split (i.e. minimal depth, MD) for each risk factor across all regression trees for each variable (Fig. 4b)34,35.

Figure 4
figure4
Importance of risk factors from in random forest models (R2 = 0.51) in predicting ΔNPV. The importance was determined by randomly permuting values for each predictor variable (VIMP) (a) and by averaging the depth of the first split within the regression tree for each variable across 1,000 regression trees (MD) (b). VIMP is expressed as the difference between MSE of ΔNPV when the risk factor values are permuted, multiplied by 1,000.

Full size image
VIMP and MD methods had nearly identical rankings for risk factor importance. Maximum canopy height was the most important predictor of damage (Fig. 4). Total rainfall and maximum sustained one-minute wind speeds associated with Hurricane María were the next most important risk factors. Antecedent rainfall over the two weeks prior to Hurricane María (including rainfall from Hurricane Irma), and soil water storage capacity (within the top 150 cm of soil), were the next most important factors, followed by geological substrate (at or near-surface) and slope. Curvature and topographic exposure to wind had the weakest association with ΔNPV compared to the other risk factors considered. The strength of interactions between rainfall and risk factors closely tied to soil water status is also indicative of rainfall playing a large role in mediating forest damage by other factors. In contrast, wind speeds displayed few interactions with other risk factors (Supplementary Fig. S6).

Partial dependence analyses of the risk factors indicate that taller forests and areas that experienced high rainfall during the two weeks before (including Hurricane Irma) and during Hurricane María had higher ΔNPV values (Supplementary Fig. S7). A positive relationship between high soil water storage capacity and ΔNPV also suggests that forests in areas with waterlogged soils may be particularly prone to damage. Water logging may have been exacerbated by wet antecedent soil moisture conditions arising from rainfall in the two weeks preceding Hurricane María, including rainfall associated with Hurricane Irma. Forest damage increased linearly with maximum wind speed until 120 km hr−1. Forests growing on steep slopes and in valleys subject to flooding had higher ΔNPV values, illustrating that forest growing in these topographic positions are more vulnerable to rainfall damage. Geological substrate had little discernible effect on ΔNPV variation among groups after controlling for the effects of other predictors (Supplementary Fig. S7). Surprisingly, forest growing in topographically wind-exposed areas had similar ΔNPV values to those in areas whose orientation and exposure were expected to have more protection from the hurricane wind (Supplementary Fig. S7).

Discussion
As in many other tropical regions, Puerto Rican forests experience large catastrophic cyclonic windstorms relatively often. Although there is some variation across the island, return intervals for hurricanes of the severity of the three most recent storms (Saffir Simpson scale 3 for Hugo and Georges and category 4 for H. Maria) are 15–50 and 50–150 years, respectively17. Tree species are adapted to these disturbances and tree mortality rates after a severe wind storm tend to be low, ranging between 7–12%, only 2–3 times background mortality rates22,36,37,38,39,40. Nevertheless, wetter and more severe storms, such as Hurricane María, expected as a result of global warming will likely exert stronger pressures on forests41. Our results suggest that storm meteorological characteristics are a key driver of forest damage, highlighting the need for understanding how more severe storms will influence forest structure, composition, and carbon storage potential.

Beyond any effects of a single storm on forests, our results also demonstrate that not only is the severity of hurricane disturbance key in driving forest damage, but the temporal pattern of disturbance also plays an important role. Trees affected by Irma may have been particularly vulnerable to damage from Hurricane María if stressed and weakened stems, saturating soils and loosened roots make stems more prone to breakage and uprooting20, or through other mechanisms of damage accumulation. Our study supports the idea that compounded disturbances can interact in ways that cannot be predicted from the study of a single disturbance42,43, an issue ecologists must address to successfully forecast the future of the biosphere under changing disturbance regimes44.

The majority of studies on impacts of hurricanes on ecosystems have been conducted at a plot level4,18,41,45 or over a limited range of environmental conditions29,46. The few studies that have characterized forest damage over heterogeneous environmental conditions using remote sensing47,48,49, have examined a limited set of risk factors, and fewer than a third of studies of this kind have been validated with field data50. As a result, our understanding of how expected shifts in storm meteorology may interact with landscape and forest stand attributes to mediate ecosystem vulnerability to hurricanes is extremely limited.

Our analysis integrated field-based estimates of aboveground forest damage with a remotely-sensed damage index to quantify the relative importance of meteorological, topographic, and stand level risk factors on forest damage during Hurricanes María and Irma across Puerto Rico. The few previous landscape and stand level studies on impacts of cyclonic storms on forests1,22,30,51,52,53,54,55 have focused on wind as the most important meteorological driver of forest damage. Our study indicates, however, that extremely high rainfall associated with severe hurricanes can be a stronger predictor of forest damage. The importance of rainfall in relation to wind speed is supported by high damage observed in areas with high available water storage and high antecedent rainfall in addition to the failure of topography to protect against damage from extreme winds. Moderate correlations between Hurricane María storm-related rainfall totals and maximum sustained wind speeds for sample locations in this study shows that the two variables display distinct patterns across the island, which in future analyses should be considered both independently and interactively as predictors of forest damage.

High rainfall together with hurricane-force winds can cause uprooting of large trees since roots are more easily dislodged from wet soils54,56 and wet foliage increases the weight of the tree crowns. This effect can be exacerbated when soils hold more water or are saturated from antecedent rainfall1,22,57,58. Our finding that forest damage was greater in forests growing in areas with high antecedent rainfall and greater soil water storage capacity underscores the importance of rainfall as a key driver of damage. In a storm with extremely high rates of rainfall, such as Hurricane María, the combined effects of rain on already saturated soils and dynamic loading from wind gusts as high as 210 km hr−1 likely led to observed island-wide patterns of vegetation damage59. Topographic exposure was the least significant risk factor of those examined in this study. This is surprising given the significance of wind speed has in determining damage. One explanation for this may be that the protective role of topography may be lessened in storms of Hurricane María’s magnitude, which may foreshadow similar effects in future intense storms.

The record-breaking rainfall brought by Hurricane María to much of Puerto Rico also led to an unprecedented number of landslides and widespread flooding59,60,61. Landslide occurrence in Puerto Rico is strongly linked to rainfall intensity and duration62. Hurricane María was a high-intensity and prolonged rainfall event that caused a landslide density of at least one per km2 in 34% of Puerto Rico47. Although there were no major landslides in our field plots, the high landslide frequency across the island may have contributed to the relationship between rainfall and satellite estimates of forest damage used in this study, particularly for areas with vulnerable clay-rich soils such as those from volcanic geological substrate (Supplementary Fig. S1)47.

Observations and models in previous studies have demonstrated that atmospheric warming will increase rainfall rates as well as wind speed during hurricanes7. Some of the most significant increases in cyclone-associated rainfall are likely to occur in the North Atlantic. Models predict that by 2100, maximum sustained wind speeds during tropical cyclones in this region will increase by 6–15%, coupled with increases of ca. +20% in precipitation within 100 km of the storm centre5,6. María is the strongest hurricane to have made direct landfall in Puerto Rico since Hurricane San Felipe in 192817 and may presage what atmospheric warming will mean for future North Atlantic hurricanes. Recent analyses60 of associations between extreme rainfall events in Puerto Rico and long-term (from 1956–2016) climatic trends in sea surface temperatures found that the probability of observing a storm with precipitation similar to that of Hurricane María has increased almost five times, and hurricane return intervals have decreased by 50%. Expected change in cyclonic storm meteorology and our results suggest the impacts of rainfall on forest damage deserve more research attention.

Methods
Study site
Tropical forests in Puerto Rico are an ideal system to examine meteorological, landscape, and forest stand-level risk factors associated with severe hurricanes, as the island encompasses a variety of marked environmental gradients in a relatively small area (910,400 ha). The island’s complex geologic history is reflected in its rugged topography (0–1,338 m a.s.l.) and diverse parent soil materials, which include alluvial, limestone, volcanic, and ultramafic materials63 (Supplementary Fig. S1). Mean annual precipitation, ranges from 800 to 4,500 mm yr−164. For this study, we limited our study area (312,319 ha) to forested areas in Puerto Rico65,66,67. Field plots68,69,70,71 cover the rainfall distribution, elevation gradients and two dominant geologies (volcanic and limestone), that are reflected in the diversity of forest characteristics present in Puerto Rico (Fig. 1, Supplementary Fig. S1, Table S1).

This study considers the impacts of Hurricane Irma, a category 5 storm that passed 100 Km to the northeast coast of Puerto Rico on September 6th, 2017 together with Hurricane María, a category 4 storm which crossed Puerto Rico on September 20th, 2017. Since these storms occurred within 15 days of one another, it is impossible to differentiate the effects of each Hurricane on forest damage. However, the majority of tree damage is ascribed to Hurricane María based on the visible effects of each hurricane on the forests (author observations, 2017) and the objective measures of storm intensity in Puerto Rico (see Supplementary Methods).

Image processing
To assess damage with remote sensing, Sentinel-2 TOA reflectance images28 for Puerto Rico were collected from September 15 - November 1, 2016 (the year before Hurricane María) and September 21 - November 1, 2017 (after Hurricane María) (see Supplementary Methods). Images were selected for the same months of each year (2016 and 2017) to represent the before and after periods to control for seasonal phenology. Pixels without cloud or cloud shadow were retained from the original Sentinel-2 TOA images within the study period (see Supplementary Methods), and used to create composite cloud-free images for the selected periods before and after the hurricanes, using the median non-masked pixel for each pixel location, within each series of images. Primary and secondary roads in the forest area were masked using TIGER 2016 (U.S. Census Bureau, 2016)72, and streams were masked using a stream file taken from the Puerto Rico Center for Municipal Revenues (http://gis.otg.pr.gov)73. Image processing was conducted using Google Earth Engine74 and ESRI ArcGIS software (version 10.5 https://desktop.arcgis.com/en/arcmap/).

Spectral mixture analysis
We used spectral mixture analysis (SMA) to quantify the pixel-level change in non-photosynthetic vegetation (NPV) fraction between composite images to obtain our metric of storm damage. SMA assumes that every pixel is a linear combination of target endmember spectra (i.e. green vegetation, shade, and NPV), and quantifies the per-pixel fraction of each endmember75. As storm damage increases the amount of woody and dead vegetation exposed to the sensor, the increase in NPV fraction (ΔNPV) after Hurricane María reflects the magnitude of storm damage29,30,31,32.

We applied linear spectral unmixing to each composite image using endmembers for green vegetation (GV), NPV, and shade. Endmember values were determined following similar analyses conducted in the Amazon31,32. Following unmixing, we normalized the fraction of NPV without shade as NPV/(GV + NPV) so that fractions reflect only relative proportions of NPV and GV, and not differences due to effects of shading75. ΔNPV was calculated by subtracting the normalized NPV fraction in the post-storm composite from the pre-storm composite. In a previous study in the Amazon32, ΔNPV acted as a signal for damage that lasted for approximately one year following an extreme wind event, until post-storm recovery generated sufficient new green tissues (mostly leaves) to obscure the NPV signal. In Puerto Rico, estimated NPV decreased in large areas in the south and other small patches scattered around the rest of the island after the storm, suggesting that these areas suffered minor damage from Hurricane María (Fig. 1, Supplementary Fig. S2). Rapid greening in the dry forests of the southwest portion of the island, far from the storm track, was likely the result of high rainfall without severe wind damage. We set these negative ΔNPV values to zero for the aboveground biomass estimation, as we are interested in estimating vegetation damage, rather than forest re-greening after the storms (Fig. 3).

Field damage assessment and landscape aboveground biomass (AGB) estimation
To validate our remotely-sensed index of damage (ΔNPV), forest damage was assessed across a series of 25 permanent georeferenced field mapped plots distributed across the island (Fig. 1, Supplementary Table S1)68,69,70,71. A survey of all trees ≥10 cm in diameter at breast height (DBH: 1.3 m from the ground) was carried out in 23 plots between January and May 2018, and in the remaining 2 plots in the autumn of 2018, to assess tree damage resulting from the hurricane. For this study, trees were marked as dead if they had no living foliage at the time of survey. The survey recorded several qualitative and quantitative observations on tree damage resulting from the hurricanes, including the type of damage to stems (uprooting or break), tree crown damage and branch loss using methods similar to other studies conducted in Puerto Rico43,76. Field assessments for loss of branches and canopy damage were combined into three classes: low (0–25% loss), moderate (25–75%), and severe (75–100%). To link field plot data to the Sentinel images required that we aggregate tree-based damage data to the pixel scale (Sentinel-2 pixel size is 10 m). Plots differ in size and shape, so we used two approaches. For small plots (i.e. <1 ha) we aggregated data for the entire plot. For larger plots, we separated data into adjacent non-overlapping subsections (Fig. 1, Supplementary Table S1). The old-growth forested area of the largest plot, the 16 ha Luquillo Forest Dynamics Plot, was divided into six 0.36 ha subplots, while the 1 ha old-growth plot from a set of chronosequence plots was divided into four subplots ranging in size from 0.23 to 0.24 ha. Only old-growth forest plots were considered and two plots that had been assessed for damage were eliminated, one due to cloud shadow and the other for partial cloud cover in the Sentinel-2 composites.

Pre-hurricane AGB
We calculated AGB (leaf, branch, and stem levels) of stems ≥10 cm in DBH for all dicot tree species present within the 25 plots, using DBH measurements and the allometric equation developed for general dicots in forests in Puerto Rico77. This size class accounts for the majority of AGB in the plots. Height for the dominant palm species Prestoea acuminata var. montana, the most abundant tree species in some forests in the island, was estimated from DBH following the approach outlined in a previous study of palm diameter and height relationships43. A separate allometry using estimated palm height77 was used to estimate P acuminata AGB. Pre-hurricane landscape-level AGB (Mg ha−1) for the study area (305,972 ha after removing roads, streams, and cloud-covered pixels) was calculated using a regression of field-estimates of AGB and LiDAR-derived canopy height data from the 3D Elevation Program (3DEP)78. The regression accounted for 37% of observed variation in field estimates of AGB (Supplementary Fig. S9). Pre-hurricane canopy height for the entire study area was derived from the 2016 3DEP LiDAR data by subtracting last return elevation values from that of first returns. Errors and unrealistic canopy height values (i.e. <0 m or >40 m) were omitted (Supplementary Fig. S1I). Field canopy height values were estimated as the area-weighted average of canopy height values for pixels within each plot.

AGB loss to hurricanes
Direct observations of forest damage were used to estimate the field plot-level AGB damaged from the combined impacts of Hurricanes Irma and María. Plot-level damage was characterized using a variety of metrics including total damaged biomass, proportion of pre-hurricane biomass damaged, proportion of basal area severely damaged (i.e. broken, uprooted or dead = BUD), stem density BUD (≥10 cm DBH), and proportion of stems BUD for each plot. AGB loss was calculated by summing the stem-level biomass of all stems broken, uprooted, or dead. For standing stems, field-based estimates of the proportions of canopy damaged (see above) were multiplied by the allometrically estimated branch-level AGB to estimate AGB lost from branch damage. The middle percentage value for the canopy damage classes described above (i.e. low = 12.5% loss, moderate = 50% loss, and severe = 87.5% loss) were assumed for AGB loss calculations. All leaf AGB was considered lost, based on field observations. Branch and leaf loss of standing, non-BUD stems were added to the estimate of stem AGB loss.

Landscape-level biomass loss was estimated from the regression between ΔNPV and the proportion of estimated AGB lost from field observations in the 25 plots (Fig. 2, Supplementary Fig. S3). For all pixels with damage, the proportion of AGB loss was calculated and multiplied by the estimate of pre-hurricane AGB. Carbon mass was assumed to be 50% of AGB values (Fig. 3)79. Estimates and 95% confidence intervals of AGB and AGB lost to the storm were calculated based on the regressions between field-based estimates and remotely sensed estimates for the 25 field plots (Fig. 2, Supplementary Fig. S9). ΔNPV and canopy height values for each pixel in the study area were included in the prediction as new data. The sum of pixel-level estimates and lower and upper confidence intervals represented the AGB and AGB lost for the study area.

Since many broken and uprooted stems will not completely die or will have delayed mortality41, this method likely overestimates immediate biomass loss. To quantify the potential error in our estimate of AGB loss, we used the most conservative estimate of AGB loss available with the data that was collected (Supplementary Fig. S4). In some field plots (n = 19), stem break height and the damaged branch percent were recorded. To estimate AGB loss above the stem break, stems in the plots with stem break height were modelled as a series of truncated cones. The radius of each cone was estimated using default parameters of tapering functions80, which have been found to be the most effective among several competing models in tropical forests81. The proportion of AGB above a given height was estimated, and AGB lost above the break from each stem was extracted from tree-level AGB (see above). In instances where percent branch damage was recorded, this was used to estimate branch damage rather than the midpoint of each damage category (see above). We used estimates of the proportion of AGB lost within the field plots to compare the method considering all broken, uprooted, and dead stem loss as well as branch and leaf loss to this conservative method using estimated AGB above break height and percent branch loss. As we have no basis for deciding which trees will live or die beyond the proportion of mortality of uprooted trees that died after previous hurricanes, both methods considered all uprooted stems living at the time of measurement to be lost, which may overestimate the actual future loss of these stems by as much as 45%43. Nevertheless, uprooted stems usually remain alive by sprouting new stems from the fallen trunk while much of the biomass in the main fallen stem will be lost. The landscape-level estimate was recalculated using the regression between plot-level proportion of AGB lost and ΔNPV to consider the total potential error in AGB loss.

Random forest models: evaluation of risk factor importance
Meteorological, landscape, and stand characteristics were used as risk factors for forest damage (see Supplementary Methods). Meteorological characteristics include Hurricane María maximum 1-minute sustained wind speeds (km hr−1) (RMS HWind, https://www.rms.com/models/hwind)82, rainfall data (NOAA, https://water.weather.gov/precip/download.php) for the day of Hurricane María landfall in Puerto Rico and the following day (September 20–21, 2017), and antecedent rainfall for the two weeks before Hurricane María (September 6–19, 2017), including that which fell during Hurricane Irma (on September 6th). Landscape characteristics include indices of slope and general curvature (curvature in the direction of water flow)78, binary topographic wind exposure (NOAA NHC, https://www.nhc.noaa.gov/data/)17,83, soil water storage capacity (gSSURGO, (https://gdg.sc.egov.usda.gov/), and bedrock geology type84. Canopy height was also included as a stand characteristic78.

Statistical analyses
Fitting models with all our variables is computationally unfeasible for all the pixels in the island. For that reason, we assessed the association between ΔNPV and risk factors by randomly sampling 20,000 points within the study area. Sample points were excluded if we lacked risk factor values for the location, which left a final total of 18,903 ΔNPV observations in the analyses. Risk factor values were extracted for a random subset of ΔNPV pixels using the R package “raster”85.

Random forest models were fit to assess the relationship between the sampled ΔNPV and risk factors. Random forest models fit many nonparametric regression-trees to the data using a randomly selected subset of predictors per tree. As output, they give the average prediction of all the individual regression-trees33. This process accommodates nonlinear relationships between the response (i.e. ΔNPV) and predictor variables (i.e. risk factors) as well as interactions between variables. All risk factors (i.e. Hurricane María maximum wind speeds, María-related rainfall, two week antecedent rainfall, slope, curvature, topographic exposure to Hurricane María winds, available soil water storage, geological substrate, and canopy height) were included in the model and a random forest model with 1,000 regression-trees was run. Analysis was conducted using the “randomForestSRC” package and the results visualized using the “ggRandomForests” package in R34,35. The importance of the individual predictors was assessed using two methods; first, we examined prediction strength while randomly permuting values for each predictor variable (VIMP); second, we calculated the minimal depth for each variable (MD), averaging across the 1,000 regression trees33,34. The importance of the selected variables was assessed using both variable importance (VIMP) and minimal depth (MD) methods. Partial dependence plots of the response variable to each risk factor were also generated by averaging prediction values for all other risk factor along the distribution of the risk factor of interest keeping other risk factors at mean values across regression-trees86. Partial dependence plots (Supplementary Fig. S7) were created using MD variable sorting importance order (Fig. 4B). We also quantified all pairwise interactions between risk factors in the regression-tree using Friedman’s H factor87. This statistic measures how much of the variation of the prediction depends on the interaction among risk factors. It assigns a value of 0 if there is no interaction at all between one risk factor and any others and 1 if all of the variance comes from interactions between risk factors. This analysis was done using the “pre”88 and “iml” packages89 with a 3,000 point subsample of our 18,903 ΔNPV sample points due to computational constraints (Supplementary Fig. S6).

Abstract
The North Atlantic ocean/atmosphere environment exhibits pronounced interdecadal variability that is known to strongly modulate Atlantic hurricane activity1,2,3,4,5,6. Variability in sea surface temperature (SST) is correlated with hurricane variability through its relationship with the genesis and thermodynamic potential intensity of hurricanes7. Another key factor that governs the genesis and intensity of hurricanes is ambient environmental vertical wind shear8,9,10 (VWS). Warmer SSTs generally correlate with more frequent genesis and greater potential intensity, while VWS inhibits genesis and prevents any hurricanes that do form from reaching their potential intensity. When averaged over the main hurricane-development region in the Atlantic, SST and VWS co-vary inversely11,12, so that the two factors act in concert to either enhance or inhibit basin-wide hurricane activity. Here I show, however, that conditions conducive to greater basin-wide Atlantic hurricane activity occur together with conditions for more probable weakening of hurricanes near the United States coast. Thus, the VWS and SST form a protective barrier along the United States coast during periods of heightened basin-wide hurricane activity. Conversely, during the most-recent period of basin-wide quiescence, hurricanes (and particularly major hurricanes) near the United States coast, although substantially less frequent, exhibited much greater variability in their rate of intensification, and were much more likely to intensify rapidly. Such heightened variability poses greater challenges to operational forecasting and, consequently, greater coastal risk during hurricane events.

Main
The annual frequency of Atlantic hurricanes—particularly of major (category 3–5) hurricanes—exhibits coherent interdecadal variability (Fig. 1a, b). Hurricane seasons during the period from the late 1960s to the mid-1990s were comparatively quiescent; however, during periods before and after this, seasonal hurricane activity was comparatively active. Hurricanes are known to be modulated by their ambient environmental conditions, particularly by SST, through its relationship with thermodynamic potential intensity7, and by VWS, which inhibits hurricanes from reaching or maintaining their potential intensity8,9,10. During the more active (or more quiescent) hurricane periods, SST in the hurricane main-development region (MDR) is anomalously warm (or cool) and VWS is anomalously weak (or strong) (Fig. 1c, d).

Figure 1: Interdecadal variability of basin-wide Atlantic hurricane frequency and MDR environmental conditions.
figure1
a–d, Time series (grey bars/lines) showing the detrended annual basin-wide frequency of hurricanes (a) and major hurricanes (b), and the main development region VWS (c) and SST (d). Thick black lines show the time series smoothed with a filter centred on the 11-year mean. The MDR is defined here as the region 10° N to 20° N, and 275° E to 340° E.

PowerPoint slide

Full size image
The interdecadal SST and VWS variability in the MDR, or simply in the tropical North Atlantic, correlates well with basin-wide hurricane activity. But SST and VWS variability in the MDR does not provide an adequate picture when considering intrabasin hurricane activity. In particular, the patterns of variability exhibit pronounced intrabasin differences between the MDR and regions closer to the United States (US) coast (Fig. 2). During periods of anomalously warm SSTs and weak VWS in the MDR, which coincide with enhanced basin-wide activity, the VWS along the US coast tends to be anomalously high, while the SST anomalies in the coastal region are substantially smaller than those found in the MDR. Of particular relevance to hazard exposure and mortality risk is the relationship between basin-wide activity and US landfall activity13,14,15,16,17,18,19. Here, I address the question of whether the patterns of variability seen in Fig. 2 project onto this relationship.

Figure 2: Patterns of Atlantic VWS and SST variability.
figure2
a–c, Leading principal component (PC) analysis loading patterns of VWS (a) and SST (b), and their associated principal component time series (c). The US east coast is shown in grey in b, and is delineated with thick black lines in a. The regions outlined with dotted white lines in a are the hurricane MDR (tropical North Atlantic) and the region through which hurricanes approaching the US coast track. The loading patterns have units of local standard deviation from local mean.

PowerPoint slide

Full size image
As discussed above, VWS prevents hurricanes from reaching or maintaining their thermodynamic potential intensity. That is, VWS acts as an intensity-braking mechanism, and hurricanes that move into regions of higher VWS are expected to weaken (or to intensify more slowly). Thus, enhanced VWS along the US coast during more active periods of hurricane activity would be expected to weaken hurricanes that approach or move along the US coast. This signal becomes clear when looking at intensification rates of hurricanes near the US coast (denoted by the northernmost white-outlined region in Fig. 2a) during active and quiescent periods (Fig. 3 and Table 1). The mean intensification rates between the active and quiescent periods are well separated for hurricanes, and particularly for major hurricanes, for which the mean intensification rates are negative in both active periods and positive during the quiescent period (Table 1). The mean rates tend to be near zero, as steady-state intensity is most likely, except for major hurricanes during the quiescent period, which are most likely to intensify by 5 knots (kt) in any given 6-hour period (Fig. 3a–d). Although the differences in the mean are statistically significant (at 90% confidence or greater), they are fairly small. The more pronounced differences are found in the variances: the distributions in intensification rate for the quiescent period are less leptokurtic than for the active periods, with distinctly broader tails. For major hurricanes near the US coast, the variance in intensification rate is two times (or three times) greater during the quiescent period than during the subsequent (or prior) active periods. This elevated variance, or volatility, in intensification rates during quiescent period—which is not just a manifestation of the smaller sample size (see Methods)—would be very likely to introduce substantial additional challenges to forecasting and warning as these hurricanes and major hurricanes approach or move along the US coast.

Figure 3: Probability distributions of observed intensification rates near the US coast.
figure3
a, b, Probability density distributions of 6-hour intensity changes (ΔV) for hurricanes (a) and major hurricanes (b) during comparatively active periods (1947–1969 and 1993–2015) and an intervening quiescent period (1970–1992). Units are knots [1 knot (kt) = 0.51 m s–1] per 6 hours. Data are provided in bins of 5-kt resolution. Error bars show ± σ (s.d.) from the mean probability density for that bin (based on bootstrap sampling). c, d, Actual counts of 6-hour intensification rates for hurricanes (c) and major hurricanes (d). e, f, Empirical cumulative distribution functions of hurricane (e) and major hurricane (f) intensification rates and their 95% confidence bounds (dashed lines). All data are taken from the region denoted by the northernmost white-outlined region in Fig. 2a, and only intensification rates over water are included; that is, weakening due to landfall does not contribute.

PowerPoint slide

Full size image
Table 1 Means and variances of 6-hour intensification rates near the US coast
Full size table
As tacitly expected, there are fewer basin-wide hurricanes during the period of quiescence, and substantially fewer basin-wide major hurricanes (Table 1). But when a hurricane or major hurricane is near the US coast, the probability of intensification is substantially greater during the period of basin-wide quiescence (Fig. 3 and Table 2). The probability that a hurricane near the US coast during the quiescent period would intensify by 10 kt or more in the following 6 hours was roughly twice that of a hurricane near the coast during the active periods (Fig. 3e and Table 2). Moreover, the probability of intensification by 15 kt or more in 6 hours was two times (or three times) more likely during the quiescent period than in the subsequent (or prior) active period. For major hurricanes, the differences are even larger. A major hurricane near the US coast during the quiescent period was about two times (or four times) more likely to intensify by 10 kt or more, and three times (or six times) more likely to intensify by 15 kt or more in the following 6 hours than in the subsequent (or prior) active period (Fig. 3f and Table 2). Rapid intensification near the coast poses a major risk, because it is difficult to forecast and shortens public warning time20,21.

Table 2 Probabilities of exceedance of 6-hour intensification rates near the US coast
Full size table
In the hurricane MDR, anomalously warm SSTs occur concurrently with anomalously weak VWS, and vice versa, so that the two factors operate in concert to either enhance or inhibit basin-wide hurricane activity11,12. This is not the case, however, when the region along and near the US coast is considered. In this region, during periods of anomalously warm MDR SSTs, VWS is anomalously strong and the local SST anomalies are substantially weaker. That is, the VWS and SST in this region tend to operate in concert to inhibit intensification during periods when the MDR is conducive to it. This region is where hurricanes approaching the US coast must track, and thus the environmental conditions act as a coastal barrier during periods when basin-wide activity is elevated. The shift in intensification rates of major hurricanes near the US coast between periods of active and quiescent hurricane seasons is particularly pronounced, and the probability that a major hurricane near the US coast would undergo rapid intensification was comparatively much higher during the last quiescent period.

The patterns of variability and co-variability of SST and VWS described here are congruent with the patterns forced by the Atlantic meridional mode (AMM)11,12. The AMM is the leading mode of coupled ocean–atmosphere variability in the Atlantic, and operates on interannual to interdecadal timescales. The AMM can be described as an intrinsic dynamic mode that is established through a wind–evaporation–SST feedback process12, which provides a plausible physical/dynamical foundation for understanding the relationship between MDR hurricane activity and the suppression of intensification along the US coast. Further empirical and numerical modelling explorations of this potential linkage, particularly on interdecadal timescales, are warranted.

The results described here raise questions regarding what might be expected if environmental conditions were to shift back towards the pattern of the previous quiescent period22,23, as well as what might be expected as the tropics continue to warm. The VWS pattern shown in Fig. 2 exhibits marked interdecadal variability but no trend since 1948. However, there is a marked SST trend that projects onto the interdecadal variability, which can be seen from the trend in the leading principal component time series (blue line in Fig. 2c). The SST trend pattern (Fig. 4) shows substantial and significant increasing trends throughout the MDR, but essentially no trend along the US coast. Considering this in tandem with the pattern of VWS variability (Fig. 2a), it seems that the effects of interdecadal VWS variability on hurricanes near the US coast have not been strongly compounded or offset by SST variability or trends. That is, the amplitude of both the interdecadal variability and the SST trend have minima along the US coast (Figs 2b, 4), and seem to have only a minor role in modulating conditions there. It is not clear that this behaviour will remain stationary under projected continued warming of the tropics, but there is the possibility that future warming will not strongly affect the control of VWS on these hurricanes.

Figure 4: Pattern of Atlantic SST trends.
figure4
SST trend pattern over the period 1948–2015 in units of standard deviation per decade. Hatching shows regions where the trends are not significant.

PowerPoint slide

Full size image
As a closing note, the inverse relationship between variability in the MDR and variability in the region along the US coast may help to explain the weak relationship between the frequency of hurricanes that make US landfall and the frequency of basin-wide hurricanes13,14,15,16,17,18,19,24, by tempering US landfall frequency increases during active periods. Similarly, the present ‘drought’ of US major hurricane landfalls25,26 could plausibly be explained, in part, by this relationship. Given the potential impacts on US coastal hazards and risk, this relationship merits further observational and modelling study.

Methods
Hurricane data were taken from the HURDAT2 archive, maintained by the US National Hurricane Center, which provides six-hourly ‘best-track fixes’ with the location of the storm centre and an estimate of the maximum wind speed (intensity) for each storm27. Intensities are provided in 5-kt increments. The HURDAT2 file used here is hurdat2-1851-2015-021716.txt (see ‘Data availability’ section below). The standard Saffir–Simpson scale was used to categorize the hurricanes. HURDAT2 data quality varies by time period considered28. Aircraft reconnaissance into hurricanes began in the 1940s, and meteorological satellite data became available in the late 1960s (with polar orbiting satellites) to early 1970s (with geostationary satellites). Here the data were separated into three 23-year periods, with the earliest period being post-reconnaissance but mostly pre-satellite; thus the data for this period are somewhat less reliable than the later data.

VWS was calculated from daily-mean winds from the National Centers for Environmental Prediction/National Center for Atmospheric Research (NCEP/NCAR) R1 reanalysis data29. The data begin in 1948 and are provided in units of m s–1. For each day, the zonal and meridional wind components were used to form the wind vectors at low level (pressure level 850 hPa) and upper level (200 hPa). The magnitude of the vector difference between the 200 hPa and 850 hPa winds provides the mean daily shear, which was then used to compute monthly averages (see ‘Code availability’ section below). The SST is based on monthly mean data from the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA)’s Extended Reconstructed Sea Surface Temperature (ERSST) V4 data (ref. 30). The VWS and SST data were averaged over the main hurricane season (August to October) and standardized at each location using the local mean and standard deviation, which were calculated from the full 68-year time series (1948–2015) at each location. Principal component analysis (PCA) was applied to the standardized data. The data are gridded and were weighted by latitude before PCA. The VWS and SST loading patterns shown in Fig. 2 were formed by regressing the first principal component of each onto the unweighted standardized data. The leading loading patterns explain 20% and 56% of the variance of VWS and SST, respectively, and their eigenvalues are well separated from those of the second loading patterns.

Probability density functions of intensity change were formed using the intensity difference between successive six-hourly fixes for all cases within the northern region outlined in Fig. 2a (22.5° N to 40° N and 262° E to 297.5° E) and for each 23-yr period. The first of the two successive fixes had to have at least hurricane intensity (Fig. 3a) or major hurricane intensity (Fig. 3b), and both fixes were always required to be over water (to avoid capturing weakening due to landfall). Error bars in Fig. 3a, b were computed using bootstrap sampling. The error bars span two standard errors from the bootstrapped means of each 5-kt bin.

Empirical cumulative distribution functions (Fig. 3c, d) were computed using the Kaplan–Meier estimator, and the confidence bounds were determined using Greenwood’s formula. Statistical significance of the separation of the means in Table 1 was determined with a Student’s t-test, and the significance of the separation of the variance was based on a standard F-test. As a robustness test for the separation of variance, the samples during the active periods were randomly subsampled 100,000 times, with replacement, to the smaller size of the quiescent period sample (Table 1). For both hurricanes and major hurricanes, the variance of the quiescent period sample is larger than the 99th percentile of variances from the random subsamples of the active periods (see ‘Code availability’ section below).

The trend map of SST shown in Fig. 4 is based on standardized data as described above. The statistical significance of the trend at each location was determined with degrees of freedom adjusted as necessary for autocorrelation. The degrees of freedom were adjusted if the 68-year time series at that location failed a Durbin–Watson test, which was applied to the residuals of the regression of SST onto year.