In the past three decades, several of Iraq’s largest lakes have experienced fluctuating water levels due to droughts, dam management, and conflict. Two lakes in particular—Milh and Habbaniyah—experienced substantial declines in water levels and lost much of their reputation as bustling resort areas.

Now satellite imagery shows the two lakes are refilling. The natural-color images above show Lake Milh on August 16, 2018 (left) compared to August 21, 2020 (right). The red color is most likely due to the presence of algae and bacteria with red pigments; a similar phenomenon occurs in a lake in nearby Iran. The images were captured by the Operational Land Imager (OLI) on Landsat 8. Older satellite imagery suggests that the lake has not appeared this full since 2009, although 2015 came close.

Lake Milh, also known as Lake Razzaza, was completed in the 1970s to receive excess water from Habbaniya Lake during flood season. Milh was one of Iraq’s largest lakes and a popular recreation spot in the 1980s. The islands within the lake served as important breeding areas for many birds, such as the flamingo.

But due to droughts and closures of connecting waterways, water levels began to dwindle. The lake’s changing water levels and increasing salinity caused several fish species to disappear. Tourism also decreased as the lake and nearby communities suffered through drought and war.


August 16, 2018 - August 21, 2020

August 16, 2018JPEG

August 21, 2020JPEG

The image above shows Habbaniya Lake (also known as Lake Ramadi), as observed by Landsat 8. In the 1980s, Habbaniya was also a popular tourist destination. However, the resort suffered after several conflicts in the 1990s and 2000s. Companies have since tried to revive the vacation spot by rebuilding facilities.

The reasons for the recent increases in the water levels are not clear. Preliminary satellite precipitation data analysis and data from ground stations do not show obvious flooding in the vicinity of the lakes recently, but heavy rains did fall in locations farther upstream in northern and central Iraq this year. Additionally, it is possible that there were changes in water storage and release patterns upstream at dams along the Euphrates River. Dams and reservoirs along the Tigris and Euphrates can significantly alter the amount of water in locations further downstream. In 2019, Mosul Dam Lake in northern Iraq displayed a similar increase in water levels, which was due from a combination of heavy rain and changes in dam management.

The Iraqi National Investment Commission has been interested in restoring both Habbaniya and Milh. In January 2018, the group unveiled a $25 million investment project to develop the areas with hotels, a marina, and an amusement park.

Following a severe drought in 2018, the unusually wet winter and spring of 2019 has swollen Iraq’s rivers, lakes, and reservoirs. Since January, many parts of the country have seen rainfall amounts that are double or triple the norm.

All of that water has to go somewhere. In northern Iraq, a principal destination has been the lake behind Mosul Dam, the largest reservoir in the country. According to data collected by the CNES/NASA Jason-2 and Jason-3 satellites, water levels in April 2019 at the reservoir reached the highest levels in at least a decade.


2009 - 2019

These observations and analyses were recorded by the Global Reservoir and Lake Monitor (G-REALM), a project sponsored by NASA and the U.S. Foreign Agricultural Service. FAS uses such water level measurements to assess irrigation potential and long-term drought conditions around the globe.

The Operational Land Imager (OLI) on Landsat 8 acquired images of the reservoir in April 2015 and April 2019. Beyond the water levels, notice how much greener the land surface was in 2019. Note also how much suspended sediment flowed into the northern end of the reservoir through the Tigris River.

Government officials and engineers monitor the stability of Mosul Dam since some areas beneath it contain gypsum, a water-soluble rock. To strengthen the dam, Iraq’s Ministry of Water Resources has been injecting cement into the foundation to replace any gypsum that has dissolved. When these maintenance operations were halted in 2014 due to a takeover of the dam by ISIS militants, scientists used radar to observe whether the dam was sinking.

In 2016, with the Iraqi government back in control of the dam, the Ministry of Water Resources enlisted an Italian firm, Trevi, and the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers to begin a three-year intensive program to purchase new equipment and aggressively treat the rock foundation with cement to ensure the stability of the dam.

Torrential rain has caused flooding in parts of northern and central Iraq. At least 5 people died after flooding caused a house to collapse in Diyala. Authorities said conditions in Nineveh, Salah ad-Din and Diyala were “tragic”.


Floods in Iraq, March 2020. Photo; Iraqi High Commission for Human Rights (IHCHR)
Severe flooding was reported in the city of Mosul in Nineveh Governorate after 124mm of rain fell in 24 hours to 18 March, which is around twice the average rainfall for March. Streets of the city were flooded, damaging buildings and vehicles. Some residents living close to the Tigris River evacuated their homes, mostly in areas north of the city.

Media reported at least one home completely collapsed in Diyala Governorate, killing 5 members of the same family.

Iraqi High Commission for Human Rights (IHCHR) said that the flooding has caused serious damages and displaced “a large number of people” in central and northern Iraq, including a number of camps for internally displaced persons (IDPs).

The Commission said many parts of Nineveh, Salah ad-Din and Diyala have been dealing with “tragic conditions”.

Some hospitals and health centres in Nineveh have been damaged at a crucial time, hindering efforts to deal with the spread of the coronavirus. IHCHR warned of a “health-environmental double disaster” with a population of nearly 2 million struggling with the impacts of flooding and the virus.
One of the oldest continuously inhabited settlements in the world, Hasankeyf, has been home to more than 20 cultures over the past 12,000 years. Early settlers carved caves into the surrounding limestone cliffs. Romans built a fortress to monitor crop and livestock transportation. Travelers on the Silk Road often stopped in the area to trade during the Middle Ages.

Remnants of past cultures have been preserved for thousands of years in Hasankeyf, which was absorbed by the Ottoman Empire in the 1500s and has remained part of Turkey ever since. But those artifacts—thousands of human-made caves and hundreds of well-preserved medieval monuments—may soon be underwater. A new dam and reservoir threatens to drown the city.

Located about 56 kilometers (35 miles) downstream of Hasankeyf, the approximately 135-meter (440-foot) tall Ilisu Dam is expected to provide 1,200 megawatts of electricity (around 1.5 percent of Turkey’s total power-generating capacity). The dam is part of Turkey’s Southeastern Anatolia Project, which consists of 19 hydroelectric plants and 22 dams on the Tigris and Euphrates Rivers. The effort is designed to help promote economic growth and energy independence for the country. But there will also be a cost.

Holding back water from the Tigris River, Ilisu Dam will create a reservoir covering 190 square kilometers (74 square miles) of land. When near capacity, the reservoir will almost completely submerge Hasankeyf and displace more than 70,000 people. Additionally, the dam will decrease water supplies to Syria and Iraq.

The natural-color images above show Hasankeyf on February 22, 2019 (left) and March 12, 2020 (right). The images below show the area near Ilisu Dam (located further downstream) on the same dates. The reservoir began filling in July 2019. These images were acquired by the Operational Land Imager (OLI) on Landsat 8.


February 22, 2019 - March 12, 2020

As of February 2020, water levels behind the dam were rising at a rate of about 15 centimeters (6 inches) per day. The reservoir is only about one quarter full and is expected to rise another 50 meters (160 feet) in upcoming months—enough to submerge thousands of nearby caves and nearly all of the Hasankeyf fortress previously occupied by the Romans, Mongols, and Seljuk Turks.

Some historical structures (including a tomb, mosque, and ancient bath) and all residents have been relocated to a new town on a nearby hill called New Hasankeyf (or Yeni Hasankeyf). Once the reservoir is full, a ferry system will shuttle people between the new town and what remains above water in Hasankeyf.

The fast-paced conflicts in the Middle East can disrupt management and supply of water, particularly on dams and barrages along the Tigris and Euphrates rivers that have experienced threats or changes in sovereignty. Water supply is also under pressure from upstream water management, drought, and structural decline. In this research, we used a satellite-based algorithm, the normalized difference water index (NDWI), to monitor changes in the extent of surface reservoirs (1985-present). We compared the timeline of reservoir fluctuations with the timeline of events related to conflicts, droughts, and dam management. Our results show that the most sudden changes in water supply occurred during events related to conflict, but conflict was not often a cause of the greatest absolute changes to reservoir area. Though not as precise as on-the-ground information, satellite data can give insights to water supply when conflict has disrupted the flow of information or restricted on-the-ground data collection.

Access provided by Specialized Presidential Council for Educ and Scientific Research Portal

Introduction
The yearly supply of water that a river delivers is a result of many factors including climate, watershed characteristics, and water management. Engineering projects for flood control and hydropower alter ecology, flow, and sediment deposits, as do water withdrawals for domestic, farming, and industrial use (Vörösmarty et al. 2010).

One human activity with potentially great consequences for river systems is armed conflict. Damage to water systems was documented during conflicts in Kosovo, Afghanistan, and other places (UNEP 1999; UNEP 2003). Water infrastructure like dams can be directly targeted by airstrikes (MacQuarrie 2004). Displacement, explosions, and movement of heavy equipment increase dust that then settles on rivers and accumulates in reservoirs (Moridnejad et al. 2015). Conversely, conflict sometimes leads to better water quality. For example, reservoir salinity can improve if agriculture is disrupted and reduces irrigation return flows (UN-ESCWA and BGR 2013; Eklund et al. 2016). Abandoned farms can free water otherwise consumed by crops, increasing river flow (Müller et al. 2016).

Satellite data can shed light on such changes. Satellite sensors capture optical signatures of water that stand in contrast to desert sand, vegetation, and cities, thereby delineating the water-surface area (Gao 1996; McFeeters 1996). Different approaches have been tested for delineating inland water bodies, often with high accuracy both regionally and globally (Pekel et al. 2016; Klein et al. 2017).

In this paper, we use satellite data to explore the effects of conflict and other factors on the Tigris and Euphrates Rivers, which flow through Turkey, Syria, and Iraq. The Tigris and Euphrates allow countries like Iraq, comprised largely of desert, to enjoy abundant water resources compared to some neighboring countries (UN-ESCWA and BGR 2013). Both rivers are fed by snowmelt from Turkey’s Taurus Mountains and Armenian highlands. The Tigris is also fed by the Zagros Mountains in Iran. Snowmelt normally occurs between April and June (MacQuarrie 2004). Dams along the Tigris and Euphrates collect snowmelt in reservoirs to prevent flooding, generate hydropower, and supply irrigation canals (Table 1; Altinbilek 2004). During droughts, the water supply in these reservoirs can fall sharply (Trigo et al. 2010).

Table 1 Dams and barrages along the Tigris and Euphrates. Dams ignored, due to small size, include Baath on the Euphrates (storage capacity of 0.09 km3) and Goksu (0.06 km3) on the Tigris. Capacities and years from Altinbilek (2004)
Full size table
The recent history of armed conflict around the Tigris and Euphrates Rivers includes the 1980–1988 Iran-Iraq War; the 1990–1991 Gulf War; the 2003–2011 progression of violence marked by the United States invasion and occupation of Iraq, and sectarian fighting; episodes of isolated airstrikes; and ongoing civil wars and insurgencies since around 2012. Obtaining information from stressed war zones can be difficult. This paper applies a formal analysis of satellite data to approximate water supply and compare the different ways that natural, engineering, and conflict stressors affect the Tigris and Euphrates. We focus on locations that have borne at least one direct episode of conflict: Mosul Dam on the Tigris River, and Haditha Dam, Falluja Barrage, and Ramadi Barrage, all on the Euphrates River. We evaluate how changes in water supply compares to government and news reports of conflict-driven change, as well as documentation of drought. We did not test these conflict-water relationships in a quantitative or statistical sense, or broaden the view to examine cooperation-water relationships. But this study may set the stage for a more statistically rigorous analysis of water-climate-cooperation events as possible future research.

Materials and methods
Study area
Mosul and Haditha Dams were built in 1985 and 1986 to provide hydropower and irrigation (Table 1; Fig. 1a; Altinbilek 2004). Approximately 140 km south-east from Haditha Dam stands a series of gates and locks (Ramadi Barrage and Falluja Barrage) through which authorities can manipulate how much water continues down the Euphrates, and how much is instead diverted to peripheral water routes (Kassim et al. 2006). One of these routes, the Warar Canal, extends south from the Ramadi Barrage, and channels excess spring floods into lakes devoted to irrigation, recreation, and wildlife (Fig. 1c). The first of these lakes, Lake Habbaniya, has two outflow canals: one diverts water back to the Euphrates, and the other carries water south into Lake Razaza (Kassim et al. 2006).

Fig. 1
figure1figure1
Map of the study area. Map a shows the Tigris and Euphrates rivers as they wend their way through Iraq to the Persian Gulf, and the major dams, with an inset map showing the location on a world map. The dotted lines indicate the watersheds of the two rivers. The satellite imagery is a most-recent-pixel-value composite of Landsat images between January 1 and September 15, 2014, timed so that the most recent pixels were cloud-free. The Tigris and Euphrates vector layers were obtained from a river and lake shapefile produced by Natural Earth. The watersheds were determined through maps (UN-ESCWA and BGR 2013) and shapefiles from the World Resource Institute. Map b shows a close-up of Mosul Dam, and the section of the Tigris River used to approximate discharge (burgundy polygon). Map c expands the black box on Map a to show a close-up of the lakes, barrages, and canals between Ramadi and Falluja in the Anbar Province. It also shows the sections of the Euphrates River (burgundy polygons) upstream of Ramadi Barrage, and downstream of Falluja Barrage, used to approximate discharge. These Landsat images were retrieved from Google Earth Engine

Full size image
Upstream of Mosul Dam, the Tigris is relatively undeveloped, with five smaller Turkish dams established. The flow of the Euphrates, on the other hand, is restricted by three Syrian dams and five Turkish dams upstream of Haditha Dam in Iraq (Fig. 1a). Most of the largest dams were inaugurated during the 1970s–1980s. The turn of the millennium ushered in a period of small-sized dam-building in Turkey and Syria.

The Turkish headwaters of the rivers develop in areas that receive upwards of 800–1000 mm of precipitation per year (MacQuarrie 2004). Further south, four local rain gages around the Tigris River near Mosul Dam recorded average rainfall of 325 mm year−1 between 1990 and 2009 (Zakaria et al. 2012). Southern Syria and Iraq receive about 75–150 mm year−1 (MacQuarrie 2004). Precipitation along the Tigris and Euphrates has declined recently, to the point that some researchers consider the region under a prolonged drought since 1999 (UN-ESCWA and BGR 2013). The two most serious periods of low precipitation occurred during the hydrological years (October–September) of 1998–2000 and 2007–2009 (Trigo et al. 2010), with another period occurring 2013–2014 (Electronic supplementary material, Fig. S1c).

Among conflicts that directly affected the Tigris/Euphrates water supply (Table S1), a notable example is the militant capture of Mosul Dam in August 2014. The capture was accompanied by a threat to destroy the dam and flood downstream Baghdad (Milner 2014). In fact, a visual inspection of the head of Mosul Dam Lake pre- and post-battle shows dramatic changes in lake-surface area (Fig. 2). However, quick visual inspections may be misleading, so we therefore applied a formal analysis.

Fig. 2
figure2figure2
The head of Mosul Dam illustrated in Landsat 8 imagery, on a June 9, b July 11, c August 12, and d September 13, 2014 shows rapid changes in the water-surface area of the reservoir. Militants captured the dam on August 8, and relinquished control on August 16

Full size image
Data
The data we needed to complete this analysis included information on the amount of water in the reservoirs studied; discharge information along the Tigris and Euphrates; precipitation data; and information on when conflicts and droughts occurred.

We used Landsat calibrated, ortho-rectified, top-of-the-atmosphere (TOA) reflectance images to measure water-surface area of rivers and reservoirs, because this was our indicator of water supply and how it changed in response to war, drought, or management (Table S2; Fig. S2 for row/path information, image distribution over time). Landsat imagery dates from 1984, and is set at 30 × 30 m2 pixel resolution retrieved from different U.S. satellite sensors (Thematic Mapper from Landsats 4 and 5, Enhanced Thematic Mapper + from Landsat 7, and Operational Land Imager from Landsat 8). These sensors and their satellite orbits have been designed to provide continuity in the data products so that imagery over the entire data archive can be readily combined over time (Hui et al. 2008).

We validated our results with finer 10 × 10 m2 resolution multi-spectral Sentinel-2 images over Mosul and Haditha reservoirs. These Sentinel-2 images come from eleven different months between 2015 and 2016. For each reservoir, we found 10 cloud-free Sentinel-2 images captured within 2 days of a Landsat image, or 20 images in all.

We used satellite-based altimeters to fill gaps in the Landsat record. Mosul reservoir has altimetry data collected by the Ocean Surface Topography Mission since 2008 (NASA 2008; Birkett and Beckley 2010). Haditha reservoir altimetry dating from 2002 was collected by TOPEX/Poseidon and ENVISAT satellites (Crétaux et al. 2011).

We used established studies to identify time of major droughts based on meteorological, hydrological, and agricultural evidence (Trigo et al. 2010), as well as estimates of rainfall from the PERSIANN Climate Data Record. The PERSIANN record dates from 1982 and provides daily precipitation based on a combination of satellite data, modeled outputs, and rain gage data (Ashouri et al. 2015). We wanted this data to assess how drought affected reservoir water quantity.

We had access to archived monthly discharge records from several Iraqi river stations, though no data more recent than 2005 (Saleh 2010). This data granted insight into water management practices, as well as allowing us to extrapolate to more recent estimates of discharge.

Our approach focused on the surface area of various water bodies, rather than the total volume. Most of the reservoirs were filled before satellite-based topographic information became globally available, and we also lacked cross-sections of the rivers, information essential for deriving volume. We did have access to 1983 and 2011 depth-height-surface area data from Mosul reservoir (Issa 2015).

The repeat period for Landsat data is 16 days, and gaps in the data record due to clouds or missing data can extend for month-long stretches. Thus, floods or quick changes that occurred entirely within a repeat period cannot be captured (Yamazaki et al. 2015; Klein et al. 2017). We used all possible images, but accept that a conspiracy of sensor absence or clouds would thwart complete data on quickly-occurring extreme events.

We used news articles, reports, and books depicting events back to 1990 to build our timeline of various conflict flashpoints.

Methods
We assembled a Landsat database in Google Earth Engine for each day on which high-quality images captured the entirety of each reservoir of interest between 1984 and 2016 (Table S2). Using the cloud.score functionality in Google Earth Engine, we masked out all pixels exceeding a cloud score of 0.25 (¼ of the pixel is cloud contaminated) and used images for which less than 1% of pixels were cloud-masked out.

We measured water-surface area by applying the normalized difference water index (NDWI) (McFeeters 1996). NDWI is a normalized difference of the green and near-infrared Landsat bands ([near-infrared − green]/[near-infrared + green]). Image pixels scoring above a threshold were classified as water (Klein et al. 2014). A threshold was determined by first creating two polygons for each reservoir, one entirely over land and one over water. Average NDWI, and the standard deviation, was calculated for the water polygon and the land polygon. The land and water distributions were separated by a gap whose magnitude varied from image to image; we placed the land–water threshold within the gap (Fig. S3). Water in rivers and along shorelines, being shallower than reservoirs and susceptible to containing bottom reflectance, had NDWI values on the lower tail of the water distribution. Thus we adjusted the threshold for every image to include as much of the lower tail as possible without trespassing onto the land distribution. We applied the following formula to achieve this goal:

T=[x¯w−(x¯L+n∗SL)]Sw−1
([1])
where x¯w, x¯L, Sw, and SL represent the mean values and standard deviations of the land and water distributions, T is the number of standard deviations below the water mean where the threshold is placed, and n is an adjustable value that can be set to achieve the best visual match. The value of n changed depending on the brightness of the image, and ranged from 2 to 11.

We converted the resulting number of water pixels into square kilometers, which represented the lake-surface area on the given day of each image. Using this information, the rate of change per day was calculated between successive images (except those separated by years-long gaps). The number of data-points per reservoir varied based on the number of cloud-free images available. For example, Mosul reservoir had 22 non-consecutive years with data, sixteen of which had at least five data-points, while Haditha reservoir had 27 years with data, twenty of which had at least five data-points. We defined years-long gaps as being at least 1.5 years. The frequency of these gaps also varied by reservoir; Mosul had five, Haditha had one. With two exceptions, all remaining data intervals for Mosul and Haditha were less than 1 year. For intervals that lasted several months, we accepted that the rate of change in lake-surface area gives less specific information. We removed contaminated data, such as a July 2009 sandstorm that obscured Haditha reservoir. We converted the 1983 and 2011 Mosul reservoir depth-height-surface area data into regression equations used to estimate total water volume from that reservoir’s lake-area.

To fill in Landsat record gaps, we regressed altimeter water-level data with Landsat-based lake-surface area for Mosul and Haditha reservoirs. We used these linear regressions to estimate surface area from water-level data when Landsat images were not available.

When validating our data, we randomly generated 22 validation coordinates each for the twenty Landsat images paired with a Sentinel-2 image. This meant a total of 440 validation points, which allowed for at least 50 validation points in each of our two classifications (water or land; Congalton and Green 2009). Twenty-four points were discarded because the corresponding Sentinel image did not extend to that particular coordinate. The remaining 416 validation points were randomly distributed over the reservoirs, desert, mountain shadows, and shorelines (Fig. S4). From these points, we calculated our accuracy in correctly classifying all real-world water as water on the satellite images (user’s accuracy), and our accuracy in not misclassifying real-world land as water on the satellite images (producer’s accuracy) (Table 2). We also include the kappa coefficient which adjusts accuracy estimates to correct for the random chance of assigning the correct labels.

Table 2 Error matrix and accuracy results
Full size table
To get general discharge trends after the official records end in 2005, we substituted river-surface area. River-surface area is often a suitable indicator of discharge so we tested whether this was true on the Tigris and Euphrates (Bjerklie et al. 2003). We compared the historically recorded discharges to same-month river-area derived from Landsat images at selected river reaches. We selected the river reaches by picking a section right next to the dam or barrage whose discharge we wanted to recreate. Each stretch of river was also chosen such that no canal or tributary joined or separated from the river in the middle of the stretch to keep the sourcing consistent. We tested four sections of river downstream of Mosul dam, and four sections upstream, downstream, and in between Haditha Dam, Ramadi Barrage, and Falluja Barrage.

Results
Extreme events
Both Mosul and Haditha reservoirs, over the entire period of record, have a surface area generally ranging between 300 and 400 km2 (Fig. 3). Haditha mean lake-area was 302 km2. Mosul mean lake-area before 2004 was 351 km2 (9.8 km3, based on 1983 Mosul bathymetry), while post-2004, it declined to 313 km2 (around 7.2 km3, based on 2011 Mosul bathymetry) (Fig. 3b).

Fig. 3
figure3
Surface area of Haditha (a) and Mosul (b) reservoirs. Haditha estimates are based on Landsat and altimetry data; Mosul only on Landsat. Lines of significance are two standard deviations from the mean. Background colors indicate: red = conflict; gray = upstream dam-building; tan = droughts. Close-ups of significant changes in water supply are provided in Fig. S6

Full size image
We identified the lake-area values that were beyond two standard deviations from mean reservoir area. Lake-surface area fell to levels below this range twice for Haditha reservoir (multi-month stretches in 2009 and 2015), and thrice for Mosul (February 1991, March 2011, December 2015) (Fig. 3; Table 3). Lake-surface area never exceeded the upper bound of this range for either reservoir. Likewise, we categorized rates of lake-area change as substantial if they occurred beyond three standard deviations from mean rates (Fig. 4). Three deviations were chosen to eliminate high rates occurring repeatedly between May and July, which we assumed were caused by spring floods. Five occasions fit this standard: at Mosul reservoir in August 1990, February 1991, and March–April 2011, and at Haditha reservoir in February 1991 and June 2014 (Table 3).

Table 3 Main episodes of substantially high or low water supply situations, or substantial changes in water supply, along the Tigris and Euphrates
Full size table
Fig. 4
figure4
Rates of change in reservoir lake-area of Haditha (a) and Mosul (b) reservoirs. Lines of significance are three standard deviations from the mean. Background colors indicate: red = conflict; gray = upstream dam-building; tan = droughts. Close-ups of significant rates are provided in Supplemental Fig. 4

Full size image
Classification error
We calculated user’s and producer’s accuracy ranging from 98 to 100% for all classes (Table 2), and a kappa coefficient of 98.9%. Land and water are highly distinguishable categories, and our formula that set the land–water threshold individually for each image also accounts for the high accuracy.

Altimeters for gaps
The altimeter-Landsat correlation for Mosul reservoir was r2 = 0.90; for Haditha, it was r2 = 0.99 (Fig. S5). We decided to therefore only use the altimetry data for Haditha reservoir, because we could depend that the estimates produced from it would be nearly identical to estimates we would have derived from Landsat images, and the transitions between the two sets of estimates would be unnoticeable. We used linear regression to convert height estimates during Landsat gap years into lake-surface area estimates.

River-surface area for discharge
Some river stretches correlated to discharge better than others. On the Euphrates, the best correlations were found on the stretch of river just upstream of Ramadi Barrage (correlation of 0.73 with Husayba station) and a stretch just downstream of Falluja Barrage (correlation of 0.64 with Hindiya station) (Fig. 1c). The two sections in between Ramadi and Falluja Barrages did not correlate strongly, likely because the water flow is too regulated between the two barrages. For Mosul discharge station, a stretch of river located about 70 km downstream was most strongly correlated to discharge (r = 0.79; Fig. 1b). This is likely because the Mosul discharge station (located right at Mosul dam) is actually upstream of a second regulatory dam (Adamo and Al-Ansari 2016). This extra layer of human management could be why river extents tested within the area of the regulatory dam and the city of Mosul itself did not correlate well with river discharge. We used river-surface area in the designated areas to look at general trends in discharge, rather than for generating specific estimates.

Droughts
Haditha reservoir underwent a 72% decline in surface area between May 2007 and October 2009 (Fig. S6d). This occurred during a major drought, and as the upstream Keban, Ataturk, and Tabqa reservoirs declined between 4 and 11%. During the 2013–2014 drought, those same three upstream reservoirs declined by 5–13%, but supplies were replenished during the following year until they were at 95–111% of their original pre-drought levels. Concurrently, surface area at Haditha reservoir dropped by 62% (Fig. S6e).

Conflicts
The First Gulf War, occurring between August 1990 and February 1991, saw rapid changes in lake-surface area. Between August 18–26, 1990, the Mosul reservoir lost an average of 3.3 km2 of surface area per day, in total falling from 372 to 346 km2 (Figs. S6a, S7a, S8a,b). In volume terms based on 1983 Mosul bathymetry, this represented a decline from 10.8 to 9.6 km3. During the same span of days, the downstream Lake Therthar increased at a rate of 2.73 km2 day−1. Over the next 5 months, Mosul reservoir continued losing surface area, at an average rate of 0.5 km2 day−1. Then, came another plunge: between January 25 and February 10, 1991, the reservoir lost about 3.4 km2 day−1 of lake-surface, for a final surface area of 215 km2, and a volume of 3.3 km3. At the same time (January 17–February 10, 1991), Haditha reservoir lost an average of 2.5 km2 of lake-surface per day, a loss of 21% in three weeks (Figs. S7c, S8c,d).

Between June 25 and July 11, 2014, a time consumed by both militant battles and drought, Haditha reservoir lake-surface area declined at a rate of 2.0 km2 day−1, a substantial rate of loss only otherwise exceeded by the drainage of Haditha Dam in February, 1991 (Fig. S7d). Around the same time, flooding was clearly visible between the towns of Falluja and Abu Ghraib. The land area affected had only 3.8 km2 water-surface on February 26, but increased to 92.6 km2 by the next available non-cloudy data point, May 17 (Fig. S9). By June 2, the wet area receded to 37.0 km2, then 11.9 km2 by June 18, and remained below that point for the rest of the year.

Other instances of substantial water loss or gain
Mosul reservoir experienced an increase of 4.0 km2 day−1 in surface area between March 29 and April 14, 2011, and then of 2.2 km2 day−1 between April 14 and May 16, 2011 (Fig. S7b). Mosul reservoir also reached substantially low levels in March 2011 and December 2015, at a time when wet-season management of the dam was changing to avoid its failure (Fig. S6b,c).

Relations to other reservoirs
By examining scatter plots of the major upstream reservoirs versus downstream Mosul and Haditha reservoirs (Fig. 5; Table 4), we found that same-day surface areas were typically positively correlated within individual years. These high correlations (r ≥ 0.85) suggest that within a single year, regional climate conditions drove water availability evenly over all reservoirs: if one reservoir increased, the same driving factor caused an increase in the others. There are a few exceptions with poor or negative correlations (2002; 2011 and 2015 between Haditha and all upstream reservoirs, and especially so with Syrian reservoirs). From year to year, the slopes of the Mosul-Turkish reservoir comparisons were remarkably similar, although after 2002, they became flatter (Fig. 5a). Yearly Euphrates correlations were more prone to high scatter.

Fig. 5
figure5
Scatter plots of reservoir size, upstream sums versus Mosul (on the Tigris; a) and Haditha (on the Euphrates). We separated the Haditha graph by the Syrian (b) and Turkish (a) upstream dams. Only years with at least three points are shown. To maximize data-points, we included only the largest reservoirs on the Euphrates (Keban, Karakaya, Ataturk, and Tabqa). Using all Euphrates reservoirs resulted in identical plots, but with fewer points

Full size image
Table 4 Correlations between dam lake sizes. Correlations after the Syrian Civil War began are outlined in red. R refers to the correlation; n refers to the number of dates for each year on which usable images were available for all reservoirs. *These correlations rounded up to 1
Full size table
Discussion
Seasonality
In general, both Mosul and Haditha reservoirs followed a steady pattern of spring flooding-induced peaks, followed by contraction over the summer and fall. The pattern was steadier for Mosul reservoir than Haditha, likely because it had fewer and smaller dams upstream. Mosul reservoir reached peak surface area most commonly in June, and occasionally as late as July or as early as May. These peaks diminished either due to downstream releases, evaporation, or irrigation usage until the lake reached its smallest surface area generally in October, sometimes in November or December. Our results showed no evidence that the timing of the June peak size had changed.

Yearly peaks at Haditha reservoir were not consistent, even during non-drought times. The peaks occurred as early as February, and sometimes as late as November. The yearly timing of the smallest lake size was equally varied. It appears releases from upstream dams regulate lake-area as well as seasonal precipitation.

Droughts and conflicts
When lake-surface area changed very quickly and substantially, the most closely associated event was often conflict; but if substantial changes occurred over a long period of time, the associated event was usually drought or dam management (Table 4).

For example, Haditha reservoir-surface area fell substantially during the three drought periods. But the median rate at which it fell ranged from − 0.35 to 0.06 km2 day−1. These rates are far less extreme than rates in both Haditha and Mosul reservoirs during the first Gulf War. These Gulf War declines were so sudden they suggested a dam breach, but in fact, a UN report confirmed that dam managers had partially drained the reservoirs as a precaution in case the dams failed during attack (Aga Khan 1991). Each drainage occurred just before the main periods of warfare: August 1990 when Iraq invaded Kuwait, and January–February 1991 when Iraq was driven out. The concurrent increase in Lake Therthar, downstream of Mosul reservoir, suggests at least some of the water released was funneled there.

At the same time, not all conflicts produced rapid changes in lake-area. One example is the U.S. invasion of Iraq between March 19 and May 1, 2003, and subsequent occupation and battles, one of the most destructive of which occurred at Falluja near Haditha (Traub 2006). Rates of change in the Haditha lake-surface ranged from a loss of 0.80 km2 day−1 to a gain of 0.99 km2 day−1 between March 2003 and March 2006. Mosul reservoir also exhibited stable rates of lake-surface change throughout spring 2003, based on available data. The precautions taken prior to combat during the first Gulf War are not in evidence. We speculate that it was harder to make plans for a conflict-driven by another power’s decisions, rather than one’s own instigations.

The same steadiness in water supply is true of the August 8, 2014 militant attack on Mosul Dam, and the fight to retake it a week later (Adamo and Al-Ansari 2016). In spite of bombardments and chaotic availability of dam workers (Adamo and Al-Ansari 2016), the rates of change in lake-surface area were not substantial. The greatest rate of loss in lake-area, 1.16 km2 day−1, occurred between August 12 and September 13. Mosul reservoir has experienced sharper rates of decrease during peaceful summers (Fig. 4b). The median rate of lake-area change, based on the six usable Landsat 8 images retrieved between June 9 and September 13, was − 0.46 km2 day−1. Exactly 24 years before these battles, Mosul reservoir was experiencing its sharpest rate of surface area decline preparatory to the first Gulf War; yet the clashes of 2014 raged without any of the same preparations, perhaps pointing either to the surprise of the attack, or a change in strategy by dam managers.

Some recent flare-ups in Iraq featured heavy fighting in Falluja and Ramadi between January 2014 and June 2016 (Cockburn 2014; Milner 2014; BBC 2015; BBC 2016; BBC 2017; Fig. 1c). These cities both have a barrage controlling water flow on the Euphrates. The battles featured airstrikes and the exchange of barrage control between government and militant forces multiple times. Despite this, the actual military campaigns (January 2014, September 2014, May 2015, January 2016, May–June 2016) were not associated with substantial changes in the river-area upstream of Ramadi Barrage, downstream of Falluja barrage, or between the two barrages.

Reportedly, militants manipulated the Ramadi and Falluja Barrages to block water from continuing downstream along the Euphrates on multiple occasions. One report suggested that they diverted water at Ramadi Barrage in June 2015 through the Warar Canal into Lake Habbaniya (Gander 2015). However, no substantial increase in these water bodies was detected at this time. The surface area of Lake Habbaniya fell steadily throughout 2015 until September, broken by a slight uptick in June, but not enough to lastingly alter the trajectory. Other reports of barrage manipulations were met with similarly routine water-surface conditions. Perhaps the manipulations were short-lived and contained between Landsat overpasses. Some only lasted days (von Lossow 2016).

The sole evidence we found on Landsat imagery of militant water manipulations was the flooded land between Falluja and Abu Ghraib during spring, 2014. This coincided with closure of Falluja Barrage. The surfeit of water removed from the Euphrates rushed into an irrigation canal which burst its banks (von Lossow 2016).

The Iraqi government also manipulated water for conflict. A substantial decline of Haditha reservoir occurred during June and July, 2014, alongside a substantial increase in river area downstream of Haditha Dam. The government planned this mass release to swell the Euphrates River and impede militants, fresh from victories across Iraq, from attacking Haditha (Rubin and Nordland 2014). To avoid further flooding near Falluja and Abu Ghraib, the excess water was presumably diverted into Lake Habbaniya, and from there into Lake Razaza (Fig. 1c). Lake Razaza increased in surface area from 329 to 579 km2 between June 18 and August 5, 2014.

Upstream dams
Several dams were built in the 1990s. Comparing pre-1992 to post-2000 lake-surface areas, we found that Mosul lake-area remained constant throughout the constructions (Fig. 3b). Haditha reservoir likewise did not substantially decline in size directly following dam-building, but afterwards, droughts had a disproportionate effect on Haditha compared to upstream reservoirs. This implies that droughts combined with water management affect the farthest downstream dam the most. Iraqi marshes situated at the farthest downstream point of the Tigris and Euphrates also contracted during droughts (Al-Handal and Hu 2014).

Reservoir sizes on the same river were generally correlated within a single year. Exceptions sometimes occurred when snowmelt expanded the upstream reservoirs, while evading Haditha; or when a delayed pulse expanded Haditha late in the summer while the other reservoirs contracted. Syrian dams also did not follow the patterns of other dams after the Syrian Civil War began in 2011 (Fig. 5b). Either Haditha/Syrian reservoirs were no longer correlated, or they were negatively correlated, meaning that as Syrian dams expanded, Haditha contracted (Table 4). This perhaps reflects the weakening of Iraqi-Syrian agreements for sharing Euphrates water as other issues took precedence (UN-ESCWA and BGR 2013). As of February 2013, all three Syrian Euphrates dams were controlled by militants renowned for flouting international conventions (von Lossow 2016).

Managing for dam failure
The sustained decline in median Mosul reservoir levels after 2006 probably reflects the deliberate decrease in volume held by the reservoir to deal with potential dam failure (Adamo and Al-Ansari 2016; Filkins 2017). This potential failure is also behind dam managers releasing water over the winter in anticipation of incoming snowmelt (Filkins 2017). Perhaps this explains why the lake-area shrank to notably low levels in March 2011 and December 2015. The reservoir area remained low for a brief span of time (unlike the prolonged depressions seen in Haditha during droughts) and rebounded following snowmelt.

Uncertainties
There is one substantial change in lake-area which we could not account for: the sharp increase experienced by Mosul reservoir between March 29 and May 16, 2011. Snowmelt might account for some of the increase, but no other snowmelt period was similar. The temperatures in spring 2011 were not unusually warm in the Mosul Dam watershed compared to other years (Fig. S10). We did not have evidence that downstream water release from Mosul Dam was cut off in 2011; nor that upstream reservoirs suddenly lost surface area; nor that conflict might have driven these high increases in the Mosul reservoir. There was no outright civil war occurring in Iraq at the time. The Syrian Civil War was mostly restrained to civil disobedience and protests until July 2011, and centered around Damascus and the south of the country—far from the Tigris River border that northern Iraq and Syria share.

Reverse pathway of water to conflict
While this paper dealt exclusively with how conflict affects water resources, other scholars have addressed the converse issue: how water resources—usually a scarcity of them—can cause conflict (Link et al. 2016). This has occurred in the Tigris and Euphrates basin, for example, the Iraq-Syria troop build-ups following the 1975 filling of the Tabqa Dam (Beschorner 1992). At the same time, there is a growing field studying the extent to which water-based disputes can lead to cooperation (Bring and Sjöberg 2017).

Many frameworks have been proposed to describe pathways and outcomes by which water scarcity leads to conflict or cooperation (Link et al. 2016). In the same way, in this paper we have shown that the mechanisms by which conflict affects water resources are also very varied. Decisions to manipulate water resources as a result of conflict can come during actual military action, or pre-empt it. Not all tensions between transboundary rivers lead to conflict; neither does all conflict leave a clear imprint on water resources. The links between water and conflict are often specific to the particular context.

Conclusions
Our results suggest that conflict was associated with most rapid fluctuations in reservoir-surface area, but not with the greatest absolute changes (Video S1). This is evident at Haditha reservoir, and may come to affect Mosul reservoir if proposed upstream projects, such as Turkey’s Ilisu Dam, are completed (UN-ESCWA and BGR 2013). Reservoir-surface areas were generally correlated yearly along a single river, with the exception of Syria’s since the onset of the Syrian conflict. Broader climate factors seemed to affect all these lakes together. We recommend further monitoring of the water situation on these rivers, as ongoing wars, population increases, and possible declines in future water supply due to climate change may increase scarcity. Satellite monitoring could contribute to an international framework for peaceful adjudication of water resources, and for monitoring the effects of drought, conflict, and management on water resources.

With a total area of >7,750 km2, the Mesopotamian marshes near the border between Iraq and Iran provide habitats for millions of birds and most of the commercial fisheries in this region. Beginning in the 1990s, human activities such as war, dam construction, restoration, and water supply diversions significantly influenced the ecosystems. Yet, to date only a handful of reports document changes in the marshes, all using field measurements or sporadic satellite observations. Here, using long-term MODIS observations between 2000 and 2012 we quantified the annual changes and long-term trends in both the vegetation and water coverage (i.e., the areas of vegetation and water) in the Al-Hammar, Al-Huwaiza, and the Central marshes, the three major marshes in this region. In addition to seasonality, the most notable patterns are the three distinctive regimes within the observation period: the 2000–2003 regime for low coverage of both vegetation and water, the 2004–2008 regime for significantly increased coverage, and the 2009–2012 regime for reduced coverage (almost back to the 2000–2003 levels). Relative to the 2000–2003 regime, increases in the vegetation coverage during 2004–2008 ranged from 50 to >100 %. It is likely that these changes are the result of human induced activities, with weather fluctuations (e.g., precipitation) playing a minor role. Continuous and sustainable monitoring through combining satellite and field measurements is required to fully understand the consequences of such changes as well as to evaluate the impacts of future restoration programs.

Access provided by Specialized Presidential Council for Educ and Scientific Research Portal

Introduction
Wetlands are a diverse set of ecological communities and are very important natural ecosystems. They cover 6 % of the world’s land surface, contain about 12 % of the global carbon pool, and play an important role in the global carbon cycle (Erwin 2009). Wetlands also provide nursery, feeding, breeding, staging, and resting areas for many species of fish, mammals and birds (Dahl 2000). Many of these vital ecosystems around the world are lost or damaged through either land use and human activities or due to climate change. Climate change imposes a great threat to wetland integrity and survival of species, primarily via changes in temperature and precipitation (e.g. Yu and Hu 2013). Wetlands are vulnerable ecosystems and may be rapidly affected by changes in quantity and quality of water supply (Burkett and Kusler 2000). Regional and local climate change induced impacts on wetlands may include air and water temperature and evaporation escalation, soil chemistry alteration, and changes in suspended sediment loading (Erwin 2009). Such changes can vary dramatically in different parts of the world, especially when anthropogenic influence also plays an important role.

One of the most important wetland areas in the Middle East, the Mesopotamian marshes (Fig. 1), suffered from rapid damage that caused severe ecological impacts. The Mesopotamian marshes (Lower Mesopotamia, 29° 55′ to 32° 55′ N and 45° 25′ to 48° 30′ E) are a complex of freshwater and brackish water lakes and impoundments constituting several sedimentary sub-environments. They form a vast shallow basin receiving water from two large rivers, the Tigris and Euphrates. Several fluvial channels cross the marshes, and discharge water into the Shatt Al-Arab River towards the intertidal flats of the North West Arabian Gulf (Fig. 2).

Fig. 1
figure1
Maps showing the location of the study region. (above) The general area showing the Persian Gulf (a.k.a. Arabian Gulf) and the country borders (white) separating Iran, Iraq, Syria, and Saudi Arabia (bottom left). The region outlined is enlarged in (below), to show the study region

Full size image
Fig. 2
figure2
a MODIS image showing the study region on 28 March 2000. The white border line separates the countries of Iraq (left) and Iran (right). The three marsh regions are outlined. b MODIS NDVI image on 28 March 2000 showing water (blue), soil or sand (yellow), and vegetation (green). See text for details on how the image was derived

Full size image
The Mesopotamian marshes provide nesting habitat for millions of birds of over 80 species which migrate from Siberia, north Europe and Africa (UNEP 2001; Evans 2002; Richardson and Hussain 2006). The marshes provide 60 % of the commercial fishery and represent the only habitat for water buffalo in Iraq (Naff and Hanna 2003). They also provide spawning ground for the economically important penaeid shrimp Metapenaeus affinis and the fish Tenualosa ilisha, which migrate from the Arabian Gulf. These marshes also serve as natural filters for pollutants coming from Tigris and Euphrates, thus protecting the northern parts of the Arabian Gulf (Maltby 1994; Partow 2001). There is worldwide interest in the Lower Mesopotamia region because this is where some of the most ancient agricultural and civilized communities (Sumerians, Akkadians, 4,000 years BC) originated, and large-scale institutional agriculture evolved alongside complex civilizations. These civilizations dominated the economic and cultural development of the Middle East during the Bronze and the Iron Ages (Riehl et al. 2008).

Since the 1990s, dramatic changes have occurred in the Mesopotamian marshes due to a series of political and other actions (see below). The Iraqi Marshland Observation System (IMOS) project conducted a preliminary analysis using satellite images between January 2003 and December 2005. It found dramatic changes in the vegetation cover (UNEP 2005), with 42 % of the original marshland recovered by November 2005. Many of the vegetation species reappeared after the 2003 re-flooding but some native aquatic vegetation have disappeared (Hamdan et al. 2010). Although marshland recovery has been estimated to be around 50 % of the original area over the first three years following restoration activities (Richardson 2010), the recovered area has declined because of continuing freshwater diversion by riparian countries—i.e., countries controlling marshland tributaries. Some attempts were made to investigate marshland recovery using Moderate Resolution Imaging Spectroradiometer (MODIS) and/or Landsat, but these were confined to short time frames using a limited number of images (e.g., Despini et al. 2009; Muhsin et al. 2011), and it is unclear what changes occurred before 2003 or after 2005. The objective of this study is to document changes in Mesopotamian marsh vegetation and water coverage (i.e., areas of vegetation and water), and discuss potential drivers, including human activities and climate variability.

Geography of the Study Area
The Mesopotamian marshes are separated from each other but connected by a network of small channels. The major marshes (known locally as Ahwar) are the Al-Hammar marsh (3,000 km2), the Al-Huwaiza marsh (2,350 km2) and the Central marshes (Qurna and Amara marshes) (2,400 km2) together with several smaller lakes and swamps (Fig. 1). These area estimates were made before desiccation in 1991 (Richardson and Hussain 2006).

The largest is the Al-Hammar marsh which extends from Nasiriya eastwards toward the northern boundaries of Basra, a distance of 120 km with a width of 25 km. Before desiccation during the wet season, this marsh expanded to 4,500 km2 with water depth exceeding 3 m. This vast area shrinks during the summer to 2,800 km2 due to excessive evaporation and decreased water supply. The Al-Hammar marsh’s major water source is the Euphrates, but overflowing water from the Tigris reaches the marsh through the Qurna marshes. The Central marshes (2,400 km2) receive water mainly from the Tigris and to a lesser extent from the Euphrates. With a 80 km length and a 30 km width, the Al-Huwaiza marsh lies on the border between Iraq and Iran and receives water from the Tigris. It formerly received discharge from the Tigris and also from the Karkha River (which flows inside Iran). However, the Karkha River has been diverted inside Iran and therefore no longer discharges to the marsh.

The freshwater parts of the marshes are inhabited by wide beds of aquatic plants, such as Phragmitis australis, Typha angustata and Cyperus papyrus. Common submerged angiosperms include Ceratophyllum demersum, Jussaea repens, Myriophyllum spicatum, Ranunculus sphaerocarpus, Vallisneria spiralis and Zannichellia palustris as well as an alien macrophyte, Hydrella sp, which invaded the marshes after reflooding. The water-lilies Nymphioides indica, Nymphioides peltata and Nymphaea lutea are common in the open water.

Data and Method
MODIS is a multi-spectral sensor onboard both the Terra (2000—present) and Aqua (2002—present) polar-orbiting satellites. With a swath width of 2,330 km, it covers the global land and ocean surface every two days. Several spectral bands were designed for land and aerosol mapping, including the 645 nm and 859 nm bands at a ground resolution of 250 m. For the convenience of data storage of processing, the collected data were divided into 5 min granules. Although MODIS surface reflectance products (MOD09GQ and MYD09GQ, Collection 5) are available from the USGS Land Processes Distributed Active Archive Center (https://lpdaac.usgs.gov/), visual inspection of the 250 m resolution products showed artificial patchiness due to unknown reasons (Hu 2009; Zhang et al. 2011). For this reason, MODIS Level-0 data were processed to Rayleigh-corrected reflectance to estimate vegetation and water coverage.

Specifically, MODIS Level-0 data (raw data in digital counts) were obtained from the U.S. NASA Goddard Space Flight Center (GSFC) through the ocean color website maintained by the Ocean Biology Processing Group (OBPG). Although data from both MODIS/Terra and MODIS/Aqua are available, to assure data consistency and temporal coverage, only MODIS data from Terra were used in this study. Data from the months of March and September between 2000 and 2012 were obtained to represent wet and dry seasons, respectively. The two months represent the wettest and driest months during the wet and dry seasons, respectively, according to long-term weather and hydrology patterns obtained from the Iraqi Metrological Organization and Seismology and the Iraqi Ministry of Environment. During each calendar month, 2–4 cloud free scenes with minimal sun glint contamination and aerosol content were carefully selected through visual examination of the browsing images. A total of 93 MODIS granules were obtained and processed for the 26 calendar months, resulting in an average of 3.6 granules per month. Ideally all available MODIS data during the entire study period (2000–2012) should be used. However, in practice this faced technical difficulties caused by scattered clouds and thick aerosols (e.g., from dust storms) as well as sun glint contamination. The multiple scenes per month assured that the mean monthly condition could be derived for the selected months. Indeed, results from the same month often show very small variations (standard deviation <5–10 %, see below), suggesting the stability of the conditions during the individual months.

The Level-0 data were first processed to calibrated total radiance data (L t) using the software package SeaDAS (version 6.4). The software was provided by the NASA OBPG (http://oceancolor.gsfc.nasa.gov). Then, the L t data, after accounting for the effects of absorbing gases (e.g., Ozone), were corrected for Rayleigh (molecular) scattering effects, yielding the Rayleigh-corrected reflectance (R rc) following Hu et al. (2004):

Rrc=pLt∗/(F0cosθ0)−Rr,
(1)
where L t* is L t adjusted for gaseous absorption, R r is reflectance due to Rayleigh scattering, θ0 is the solar zenith angle, F 0 is the extraterrestrial solar irradiance at data acquisition time. For simplicity the wavelength dependence is omitted here.

R rc at 645, 555, and 469 nm were used as the Red, Green, and Blue channels to compose the RGB “true-color” images for visualization. The 645 nm data have a ground resolution of 250 m. The 555 and 469 nm data have a ground resolution of 500 m but were resampled to 250 m. An example is shown in Fig. 2a, where the boundaries of the major marshes, as well as the Iraq—Iran border are annotated. In these RGB images, dark pixels represent either water or submerged vegetation on the bottom of shallow-water; green pixels represent vegetation (either on land or emerged from water); yellow or white colors represent sand or hard surface; and brown colors represent soil. Yet, quantitative estimates of each category require more than visual interpretation.

Since its debut in 1973 (Rouse et al. 1973), the concept of using the Normalized Difference Vegetation Index (NDVI) has been widely adapted to map global vegetation and land-based primary production. Based on the MODIS Rrc data, NDVI was derived as

NDVI=[Rrc(859) --Rrc(645)]/[Rrc(859)+Rrc(645)],
(2)
The definition is based on the observation that vegetation has higher reflectance in the near infrared (859 nm) compared to the red (645 nm) portion of the reflectance spectrum - i.e., the “red edge.” Normalization to the sum of the two reflectances will partially remove the effects due to the variable aerosols (Rouse et al. 1973). Although other forms of indexes such as the Enhanced Vegetation Index (EVI, Huete and Justice 1999) or the Floating Algae Index (FAI, Hu 2009) have shown advantages over NDVI in their tolerance to variable aerosols (e.g. Yu and Hu 2013), the carefully selected aerosol-poor and glint-free MODIS images made NDVI a reasonable choice (as NDVI can tolerate perturbations from thin aerosols (Hu 2009)). This is especially true when considering that one of the required bands (469 nm) in calculating EVI has lower resolution (500-m) and one of the required bands (1,240 nm) in calculating FAI has frequent striping noise and missing data due to malfunctioning detectors. Indeed, for low-aerosol scenes, NDVI derived from R rc is nearly equivalent to that derived from fully-corrected surface reflectance (Hu 2009).

One difficulty in using NDVI to map vegetation is the determination of the NDVI threshold (NDVIthresh) to separate vegetation from other land surfaces. To minimize the effect of arbitrary or subjective selection, three steps were used to determine the NDVIthresh. First, a histogram of NDVI values from all pixels within the study region was plotted and examined (Fig. 3). Changes in the histogram slope, as indicated by the dashed line, represent changes in the surface type as the same surface type is expected to show continuous slope shapes without local inflection points. In this case, such slope changes represent deviation between vegetation and non-vegetation surfaces. The point connecting such changes is effectively the local minimum or maximum in the derivative spectra, and therefore was chosen as the NDVIthresh. In this case, NDVIthresh was determined to be 0.16. Second, a NDVI gradient image was created where the gradient value of each pixel was a root-mean-square of all NDVI differences with its 3x3 neighboring pixels. The gradient values along the vegetation and non-vegetation boundary are the local maxima. The mean NDVI of these maximum-gradient pixels was very similar to the histogram-determined NDVIthresh. Finally, the classified image, based on such-determined NDVIthresh and another threshold value to separate water from non-water surfaces (Fig. 2b), was compared with its corresponding RGB image. Very similar patterns in their “greenness” distributions were found.

Fig. 3
figure3
Histogram of MODIS NDVI data collected over the study region on 28 March 2000. The dashed lines denote the choice of the NDVI threshold of 0.16 to separate vegetation from non-vegetation. The threshold was also verified by comparing NDVI images and corresponding RGB images

Full size image
Fig. 4
figure4
Changes in vegetation and water coverage in the three marsh regions (Fig. 2), derived from MODIS NDVI data. A threshold of NDVI ≤0.0 was used to delineate water, and NDVI ≥0.16 was used to delineate vegetative cover. The thresholds were determined using statistics of NDVI histograms (Fig. 3), gradient images, and visual examination. During each calendar month of March and September between 2000 and 2012, at least 2–4 images were used in the calculation, and the vertical bars represent standard deviations. Note the dramatic changes in vegetation coverage between 2003 and 2004 and 2009–2010, likely due to human activities

Full size image
The threshold method to separate vegetated from non-vegetated land pixels is equivalent to a binary classification method in the sense that a pixel is treated as either 100 % vegetated or 100 % non-vegetated land pixel. The estimates of the total vegetation area are therefore sensitive to changes in the choice of NDVIthresh. A sensitivity test was then carried out to evaluate the validity of the estimated vegetation area and the observed temporal patterns, where each classified “vegetation” pixel was assigned a weight. The weight was determined by a linear un-mixing equation from the 0 % vegetation coverage (NDVI =0.16) and 100 % vegetation coverage (NDVI =0.5). For each marsh, the weighted vegetation coverage was estimated from each MODIS image, and compared with the non-weighted estimates from the same image.

Similar to the choice of NDVIthresh to separate vegetated from non-vegetated land pixels, a threshold to separate water from non-water pixels (NDVIwater) was determined to be 0.0. Here “vegetated” means both land-based vegetation and emergent vegetation, “non-vegetated” means everything else (non-vegetated land, and vegetation submerged in water). This selection was based on comparison between NDVI gradient images, NDVI images, and RGB images. The goal of this step was to map open water in marshlands and such a threshold based method HELPS TO distinguish open water from other potentially confused pixels such as wet soils or inundated soils with emergent vegetation. This is because that boundary pixels between water and non-water are often associated with local maximum gradients and thus can be easily identified in ENVI software (Exelis Visual Information Solutions, version 4.7). The mean NDVIwater value (0.0) associated with these maximum-gradient pixels was thus determined to separate water from land pixels. This method has been used by Hu et al. (2010) and Feng et al. (2012a) to find the land-water boundary around two lakes in China.

Figure 2b shows an example of a classified image which corresponds to the RGB image shown in Fig. 2a. Note that although there appears to be a large pond in the northern part of the Al-Huwaiza marsh, the NDVI classification image in Fig. 2b indicates that most of the pixels are indeed vegetation, and only a small portion of the dark area is covered by water. Thus, the NDVI method provided a quantitative and more objective way than visual inspection to classify vegetation and water coverage. The mean and standard deviation of the area coverage for each calendar month and for each marsh were then calculated from all cloud-free and glint-free images in that month. Note that although the number of classified vegetation pixels is sensitive to the selection of NDVIthresh and other factors (e.g., benthic vegetation in extremely shallow waters), the vegetation coverage after weighting pixels is less sensitive, and the temporal patterns of vegetation changes are insensitive to the selection of NDVIthresh (see Discussion).

The water balance in the marshes is determined by precipitation, evaporation, and river inputs and outputs. Precipitation over the study region was determined from the Tropical Rainfall Measuring Mission (TRMM) satellite measurements. The monthly precipitation rate product (TRMM 3B43, V7) from 1998 to 2012 was obtained from the NASA Goddard Earth Sciences (GES) Data and Information Services Center (DISC) (http://disc.sci.gsfc.nasa.gov/), and then integrated for every year to provide the mean annual precipitation over the study area. Although there is no monthly data collected from local rain gauges to validate the satellite estimates, validation in other areas, for example in southern China (Feng et al. 2012b), suggests that these satellite-based monthly estimates are reasonable, at least to first order. Further, annual cumulative rainfall data, available from the Iraqi Metrological Organization and Seismology, Basra, also provided a qualitative validation. The MODIS Global Terrestrial Evapotranspiration (ET) Data Set (MOD16, Mu et al. 2007) was obtained from the Numerical Terra dynamic Simulation Group (NTSG) (http://ntsg.umt.edu/project/mod16). The daily data showed uncertainties of 10–30 % (Mu et al. 2011). Similar to precipitation, these data were also used to provide the mean annual evaporation over the study area.

River discharge data were obtained from the Iraqi Ministry of Environment. Water influx into the marshes is the sum of water flow coming from Tigris and Euphrates measured separately. River discharge was calculated by multiplying the area of water in the river cross section by the average velocity of the water in that section (Fig. 5).

Fig. 5
figure5
Average sum of monthly water discharge rate from the Tigris and Euphrates rivers entering the marshes

Full size image
Fig. 6
figure6
a Annual cumulative precipitable water and evaporation over the study region (Fig. 2) derived from TRMM measurements (version 7 data products) and MOD16 product. During the dry season the precipitable water is near zero. b Annual cumulative precipitation from local rain gauges. Although their magnitudes are slightly different, there is a general agreement in the long-term annual patterns between satellite-derived precipitable water and field measured precipitation. The differences may be due to differences in coverage and data collection methods

Full size image
Results: Changes in Vegetation and Water Coverage
Figure 4 shows the long-term changes in the vegetation coverage and water coverage in each of the three marshes. Although there are some inter-annual fluctuations, there are three general regimes identified from these time-series data. The first is the period before 2004, when both vegetation and water coverage were stable in all three marshes except some small variations in vegetation coverage in the Central marshes. The second period is 2004–2009, when vegetation coverage was statistically significantly higher than during the previous period in all three marshes. During the third period after 2009, vegetation coverage in all three marshes declined, but was still slightly higher than the pre-2004 level. One interesting feature is that in the Central marshes, vegetation coverage showed clear seasonality before 2008, with higher coverage in March (wet season) than in September (dry season). Such seasonality is not apparent in other marshes (Fig. 6).

Similar to the three regimes for the vegetation coverage, three regimes for the water coverage are also found and coincide with those for the vegetation coverage. Except for the Central marshes, the increase in water coverage after 2004 was statistically significant; however, the water coverage declined after 2009. The changes in the Al-Hammar marsh are most significant, as water coverage between 2000 and 2003 was virtually zero for all months. Between 2004 and 2008, water coverage during March was >200 km2, representing a statistically significant change. Similar changes are found in the Al-Huwaiza marsh, where water coverage increased from <100 km2 to >400 km2 after 2004. In contrast, in the Central marshes water coverage has remained virtually zero for nearly all months since 2000.

Discussion
Accuracy of the Change Detection
The time-series data were derived from MODIS NDVI data using an objective method to determine the threshold values, where each “vegetation” pixel was assumed to contain 100 % vegetation coverage. Obviously this is a crude assumption. Then, are these results valid? A sensitivity test was used to evaluate the validity of the observed temporal patterns using the unmixing method described above. Results are plotted in Fig. 7. It is clear that the weighted vegetation coverage is always lower than the non-weighted coverage, yet there is a strong and statistically significant correlation between the two, with the coefficient of determination R2 = 0.84, 0.91, and 0.93 for the Al-Huwaiza marsh, Central marshes, and Al Hammar marsh, respectively. Thus, although the pure vegetation coverage is smaller than shown in the time-series graph in Fig. 4, their relative temporal patterns remain valid. This conclusion would still hold true even if the threshold values were to be changed. Indeed, although such threshold changes would lead to changes in the absolute vegetation coverage, the latter change is less sensitive (as compared to the unweighted method) to the threshold changes (e.g., a −5 % change in the NDVI = 0.16 threshold would lead to a 15 % increase in the unweighted vegetation coverage but only <5 % increase in the weighted vegetation coverage).

Fig. 7
figure7
Comparison between vegetation area and weighted vegetation area, where the latter was calculated by assigning a fractional weight for a partial coverage pixel. Each point represent a calendar month where the horizontal and vertical bars represent standard deviations for that month. For the three marsh regions, R2 values between the weighted and non-weighted areas are 0.84, 0.91, and 0.93, respectively. The ratios between weighted and non-weighted areas are 0.74 ± 0.13, 0.46 ± 0.12, and 0.58 ± 0.13, respectively

Full size image
The same argument also holds true for benthic vegetation in extremely shallow waters. Due to strong water absorption (absorption coefficient ~4.2 m−1 at 859 nm, Palmer and Williams 1974), even for 30-cm shallow water, only 8 % of the benthic reflectance can contribute to the surface reflectance (exp (−4.2 × 0.3 × 2) =8 % where ‘2’ accounts for 2-way light attenuation), leading to small uncertainties in the vegetation estimates. Visual examination of Fig. 2b shows that most water patches are isolated from the vegetation patches, indicating that the likelihood of having mixed pixels (partial water + partial vegetation) is reduced. Indeed, comparison between Landsat observations (30-m) and MODIS observations (250-m) over a highly dynamic lake region in both wet and dry seasons showed agreement in the classified water coverage to within 5 % (Feng et al. 2012a). Thus, the large inter-annual changes observed from the MODIS time-series (50 to >100 %) should overwhelm these uncertainties and therefore the general trend should be valid. In this regard, although the lack of concurrent field data may make the absolute magnitude in the vegetation coverage estimate questionable, the relative temporal patterns (seasonal and inter-annual) should be realistic because of the consistent method and thresholds used in the classification.

Causes of the Observed Changes
While some seasonality is observed in the three marshes as they receive discharges from different rivers (Al-Hammar marsh is fed by the Euphrates river, Central marshes are fed by the Tigris River; Al-Huwaiza marsh is fed by the Tigris and the Karkha rivers from Iran), the most notable changing patterns are the three regimes. Then, what caused these changes?

Indeed, the Mesopotamian marshlands deterioration started in 1992 when the Iraqi government for military purposes began a desiccation project by diverting water discharge of the Tigris and the Euphrates to flow away from the marshlands (Brasington 2002). In addition Turkey and Syria have built several dams on both rivers which greatly reduced water discharge entering Iraq. Subsequently, the majority of the people who relied on the marshes for their livelihood were forced to leave, with most of fauna and flora destroyed (Richardson and Hussain 2006). This population, (approximately 500,000) left their homes for either Iran or other places in Iraq. By late 2003 (after removal of the Iraqi regime), a restoration program to rehabilitate the Mesopotamian marshes was initiated by national and international efforts through reflooding (UNEP 2005). During the following five years, 58 % of wetland was recovered (UNEP 2005), with the coverage of the Mesopotamian marshes reaching 4,950 km2 in 2008 (Dempster 2007; Al-Ansari and Knutsson 2011). However, the coverage declined to 3,420 km2 in 2009, largely resulting from river damming, primarily in Turkey, causing a dramatic decrease of freshwater discharge from the Tigris and Euphrates. Currently, only 10 % of the historical marshland has remains. The observations here showed minimal vegetation coverage occurred in late 2009 and early 2010 in all three marshes, consistent with these historical reports.

The three distinctive regimes from the MODIS observations can also be correlated with the following known human activities. Prior to 2003 represents a period of dry marshlands when most of the marshes were desiccated and only a few lakes remained, particularly in Al-Huwaiza marsh where part of water source came from the Karkha River in Iran. The discharged water also reached the central marshes through small channels connecting the marshes. The period from 2004 to 2009 exhibited the highest water coverage resulting from marsh reflooding. During this period, water from the Tigris and Euphrates was redirected to flow towards the marshes. After 2009 (third period), water flow from those rivers was reduced by dams built mostly in Turkey but also in Syria (Al-Ansari and Knutsson 2011). Clearly, human activities correspond well with the observed changes during the 13-year period between 2000 and 2012.

Did local precipitation or evaporation also play an important role in driving these changes? Figure 6a shows that although there is inter-annual variability in local precipitable water and evaporation, the magnitudes of the precipitable water are very small. The long-term average precipitation between 1998 and 2012 is 0.39 mm day−1. As a comparison, Adler et al. (2009) showed global zonal mean of 1.5–6.0 mm day−1 between 36°S and 36°N based on a 10-year TRMM climatology. The magnitudes of the precipitable water are further verified by the annual cumulative rainfall data collected by local groups (Fig. 6b). Although the magnitudes and temporal variability between these two measurements are slightly different due to differences in their coverage and data collection methods, their long-term annual patterns are comparable. Integration of this rate over the three marshes (7,750 km2) yielded a total precipitation rate equivalent to 35 m3 s−1. Thus, compared with river inputs, location precipitation and evaporation play minor roles in modulating vegetation and water coverage in the marshes.

Implications for Management
The significant human-induced changes in the Mesopotamian marshes had great impacts on their biota. The dried marshes endangered a number of species normally living in or migrating to the marshes, as they serve as the nursery ground for the migrating shrimp Metapenaeus affinis (Salman et al. 1990) and the clupeid fish Tenualosa ilisha which migrate from the Arabian Gulf for reproduction (Al-Dubakel 2011) as well as the habitat of the Basra warbler (Acrocephalus griseldis) and the marbled teal (Marmaronetta angustirostris), where 90 and 60 % of the world population of these birds inhabit these marshes (Al-Ansari and Knutsson 2011). Furthermore, the vast Mesopotamian marshes formerly acted as filtering buffers for the waters discharged by the Tigris and Euphrates rivers to the Gulf (Saeed et al. 1999). However, the reduction in vegetative cover and water storage in these marshes may lead to more land-based pollutants discharged to the Gulf, and cause possible water quality degradation.

Given the changes observed from MODIS measurements, one important question is whether the rehabilitation program, started in 2003, would have restored the natural environment of the marshes. The answer remains elusive. If the water influx received in 2003 and 2004 were to have remained consistent for the following years, perhaps a more definitive answer could have been determined. Unfortunately this was not the case due to other human activities. On the other hand, the long period of desiccation (12 years before the rehabilitation) may have caused irreversible damage that made recovery rather difficult. Although some scientists (e.g. Richardson and Hussain 2006) believe that the marshes may regain their recreational ability, it is not apparent whether the rehabilitation process has achieved its goals (Ruiz-Jaen and Mitchell 2005; Douabul et al. 2012).

The restoration effort has proven to be only partially successful as shown by the MODIS time series, due apparently to other human activities (e.g., construction of dams, water supply diversions) for both management purposes and political reasons. The present observations revealed continuous reductions between the 2004–2008 and 2009–2012 regimes. A reversal of such reductions can only be achieved through large-scale restoration programs to allow more freshwater influx from the Tigris and Euphrates Rivers, as most of the reduced discharge in the past decade eventually entered the Gulf, leading to a net loss of freshwater in the marshlands. One such program may be construction of a dam or a regulating barricade downstream of Shatt Al-Arab River to keep water in the marshes. Such programs, yet to be implemented in the case of the Mesopotamian marshes, are possible only through collaboration between the riparian countries under the guidance of the international laws, treaties, and regulations on water sharing by these countries. In any case, a continuous monitoring program is required to evaluate the long-term and short-term changes in the marshes in response to changes in policies and management efforts.

Conclusion
The deterioration of the Mesopotamian marshlands during the last two decades is an example of the negative impact of human activities on marshlands. The MODIS-based observations provide the first long-term (13-year) time-series to quantify the changes in both vegetation and water coverage, whose long-term trends are supported by both refereed and gray literature as well as historical information available from news reports. A sustainable monitoring program will be required to fully understand the effects of anthropogenic actions on Mesopotamian marshlands.

Karbala’s Lake Milh hasn’t seen a lot of visitors in the last few years. Once a popular picnic destination for Karbala residents, the lake’s water has dwindled, leaving most of it a desert with nothing but derelict fishing boats and dead animals.

The second-largest lake in Iraq, Lake Milh is also known as Lake Razzaza; it lies west of Karbala and southwest of Baghdad. It is fed by the Euphrates River as well as rainfall and groundwater sources. Over the last decade, however, it has been drying up.

Saeed Ali, a fish vendor who lives near the lake, told Al-Monitor, “The lake was an important source of fish in the '80s and '90s. But with time, it has become a mere pond that will one day dry out completely if the issue is not addressed.”

Furat al-Tamimi, head of the parliament’s Committee for Agriculture, Water and Marshlands, said the situation requires immediate attention. He told Al-Monitor, “The Ministry of Water Resources and the committee are informed of the situation at Lake Milh. We are tracking the declining water levels at the lake with great concern. This is also happening in many other lakes and rivers.”

Tamimi said the lake's falling levels are related to the drought that has plagued Iraq since 2017; some estimate the drought will continue until 2026. But there are no plans to restore the lake, said Tamimi, a deputy from Ammar Hakim’s Hikmat movement. He said a number of civil society activists and specialists on natural resources in Karbala province have criticized the “government’s idleness over the water crisis in Lake Milh,” with some activists working together on a media campaign to draw the world’s attention to the lake.

Engineer Aoun Thyab, the most senior member of the advisory board of the Ministry of Water Resources, said the problem is much more complicated. “Addressing this problem is not so simple,” Thyab told Al-Monitor. “Protests and calls on environmental groups won’t solve it because the problem is related to internal and regional policies involving the water sector, as well as the rain and streams that flow from the desert.”

Thyab said the Ministry of Water Resources dropped Lake Milh entirely from its water supply calculations in a 2015 strategic study. “As such, Lake Milh is no longer seen as useful for irrigation, water storage or fish farming.”

He said Lake Milh’s levels decreased from 34 meters (112 feet) above sea level to 20 meters (66 feet) with the drought. “This was due to a number of overwhelming factors, especially the decrease in the Euphrates River, which is the lake’s inflow, because of the Turkish dams that reduced Iraq’s water share. Add to this the scarcer rainfall in recent years and the depletion of streams that flow from the desert around the lake.”

He said, “Lake Milh has also seen higher evaporation levels, which increased salinity, making it effectively impossible for fish to inhabit the lake.” Thyab said that in the 1990s the Iraqi Ministry of Agriculture experimented with a project to farm sea fish but that project proved to be a failure. “It is safe to say that the lake is dead.”

Thyab's remarks indicate that it would be next to impossible to restore Lake Milh as a tourist attraction whose beautiful flora and fauna once brought foreign and Iraqi tourists from every province.

Karbala has also suffered greatly from the armed conflicts in the last decade, most recently when armed groups who fought against the Iraqi state used it as a base. The city of Karbala's practice of draining polluted water into the lake has also contributed to the problem.

But there is hope for the lake yet. In January, the Iraqi National Investment Commission (NIC) unveiled a $25 million investment project to rehabilitate and develop both Lake Milh and al-Habbaniya, a lake linked to Milh by the narrow Sin-Al-Thibban Canal.

The project includes building a tourist attraction over approximately 4,000 acres and overhauling the existing hotels and 200 apartments to modern standards, as well as a full amusement park, a marina, world-class restaurants and a media center.

The locals worry that the efforts come too late to save the lake. Local engineer Fayez Eisa, who oversees the area's anti-desertification project, told Al-Monitor, “Tired of dealing with the bureaucratic red tape on contracts and permits, the Karbala Holy Shrine administration has established a green belt around 2000 dunams (494 acres) of desert land, where they dug dozens of wells to provide water to the farming areas around Lake Milh.”

Lakes such as Milh represent essential natural reservoirs in efforts to fight the drought that haunts Iraq's agriculture sector. Cooperation with neighboring countries to restore and protect them will be crucial to the region's survival.