Abstract
Relocation of earthquakes recorded by the agency for meteorology, climatology and geophysics (BMKG) in Indonesia and inversions of global positioning system (GPS) data reveal clear seismic gaps to the south of the island of Java. These gaps may be related to potential sources of future megathrust earthquakes in the region. To assess the expected inundation hazard, tsunami modeling was conducted based on several scenarios involving large tsunamigenic earthquakes generated by ruptures along segments of the megathrust south of Java. The worst-case scenario, in which the two megathrust segments spanning Java rupture simultaneously, shows that tsunami heights can reach ~ 20 m and ~ 12 m on the south coast of West and East Java, respectively, with an average maximum height of 4.5 m along the entire south coast of Java. These results support recent calls for a strengthening of the existing Indonesian Tsunami Early Warning System (InaTEWS), especially in Java, the most densely populated island in Indonesia.

Introduction
Seismic gaps off the southwest coast of Sumatra, which pose a risk for generating future megathrust events, have been studied in detail (e.g., Refs.1,2,3,4). On the other hand, seismic gaps further southeast along the Sunda Arc adjacent to Java, the main island of Indonesia with a total population of more than 150 million people, have been less intensively studied. The regions along the southern coast of Java, e.g., Pelabuhan Ratu, Pangandaran, Pacitan, and Banyuwangi (see Fig. 1a), have grown rapidly in recent times and are prone to large earthquakes and their associated tsunamis, which can be devastating. In 1994 and 2006, tsunamigenic earthquakes of magnitude < 8 occurred near Banyuwangi (Mw 7.8), East Java7 and Pangandaran (Mw 7.7), Central Java8, respectively (Fig. 1), and the accompanying tsunamis killed a combined total of nearly a thousand people.

Figure 1
figure1
Regional setting and distribution of epicenters. (a) Map of the study area. Plate motion is from Altamimi et al.5. The bathymetry data were taken from ETOPO16. Inset shows the location of the study area (red rectangle) with respect to southeast Asia. (b) Distribution of epicenters of relocated earthquakes with magnitude ≥ 4.0. The earthquake data (2009–2018) were taken from BMKG. The focal mechanisms of events with M > 7.0 are plotted at ISC-EHB locations and are taken from the Global Centroid Moment Tensor (gCMT) solution catalog (https://www.globalcmt.org); (cf. Supplementary Fig. 2, i.e., all ISC-EHB locations from 1964 to 2016). Note that focal mechanisms are coloured according to gCMT depths, which are not always consistent with the ISC-EHB depths e.g. the 1994 Java earthquake, which is most likely shallow. Regions that lack seismicity (as approximately indicated by the red shaded areas on the map) are interpreted as seismic gaps. Black rectangles (A–C) indicate the location of vertical cross sections shown in Fig. 2. We intentionally compress the colour mapping so that all events below 50 km depth are dark blue such that it is more straight forwards to distinguish upper plate crust events from downdip interface events, and events in the oceanic plate from updip interface events.

Full size image
South of Java, Jurassic-age seafloor with a thick sediment cover is subducting beneath the edge of the Sundaland margin at the Java Trench (see e.g., Ref.9). The absence of recent great earthquakes may indicate that even more powerful tsunamigenic events along the south coast of Java are a potential threat. If this is true, then the release of effective early warnings needs to be a high priority, since most people living in high tsunami risk areas will have little time to evacuate. However, the presence of a seismic gap does not necessarily imply the accumulation of elastic strain, since slow slip events could be responsible for ongoing energy release10,11. While there is no evidence for slow slip along the Java Trench, this may be due to a lack of observations, such as could be acquired from seafloor geodetic investigations12. Nevertheless, while slow slip cannot be ruled out, recent studies13 have found evidence of tsunamigenic deposits along the coastline facing the Java Trench, which point to the occurrence of historic megathurst events.

In this study, we use new data taken from the Indonesian Tsunami Early Warning System (InaTEWS) catalog reported by BMKG, together with data from the International Seismological Centre (ISC) catalog, to investigate the potential for megathrust earthquakes and consequent tsunamis south of Java. From this combined dataset, we extract P- and S-wave arrival-times from 436 seismic stations at local, regional, and teleseismic distances in the period from April 2009 to November 2018 (Supplementary Fig. 1a). We limited the earthquake data to those events that have an azimuthal gap of less than 210°, following14, and at least 10 P- and S-phase arrival times. Using this dataset, we were able to accurately relocate a total of 1898 earthquakes with Mw ≥ 4.0 in the study region. The relocation was achieved using the teleseismic double-difference technique that is part of the teletomoDD method introduced by Pesicek et al.15, which also permits local and regional recordings of earthquakes to be included.

Besides the seismic data analysis, we also inverted 6 years of GPS data from 37 stations in Central and East Java to investigate slip deficits that can lead to future earthquakes. These results were combined with those of a previous study of West Java in order to generate a composite model of slip deficit rate for the whole of Java. The source areas and expected slip inferred from the GPS data inversion results are then used for numerical modeling of tsunami heights via finite difference solution of the long wave equation. Three different rupture scenarios are tested, with a focus on maximum wave height along the south coast of Java.

Results
Our earthquake relocation results show clear elongated zones, located between the coast of Java and the Java Trench, which lack seismicity and hence are identified as seismic gaps (Figs. 1b and 2 ). The approximate location of these gaps is highlighted by the red rectangles in Figs. 1b and 2 (see Supplementary Fig. 2 for a comparison plot that also includes all ISC-EHB events of Mw ≥ 4.0 from 1964 to 201616). These gaps are symptomatic of subduction zones which hold significant potential for great earthquakes; elsewhere, such as parts of offshore Sumatra (see Supplementary Fig. 3), where recent seismicity has filled the seismic gaps, large earthquakes are not expected. If it is assumed that the gap corresponds to a lack of earthquakes on the plate interface17 of the subducting slab, as described by the Slab2.0 model18, then the “locked” region of the subduction interface extends to a depth of between 20 and 30 km (Fig. 2), close to the base of the upper plate crust, which would be consistent with a typical seismogenic zone for large subduction zone earthquakes.

Figure 2
figure2
Cross sections of relocated earthquakes with magnitude ≥ 4.0. The locations of cross sections A–C are shown in Fig. 1b. The focal mechanisms of events were taken from the Global Centroid Moment Tensor solution catalog (https://www.globalcmt.org). Blue lines depict the plate interface of the subducted Indo-Australian Plate according to the Slab2.0 model18, while green and black lines depict the oceanic and continental Moho depths, respectively (taken from58,59,60). The thick red lines denote the approximate locations of seismic gaps, and are drawn to be consistent with Fig. 1b. Again, we compress the colour mapping so that all events below 50 km are dark blue as in Fig. 1b. Note that focal mechanisms are coloured in the same way as Fig. 1b.

Full size image
The epicentral shifts of relocated events are in general perpendicular (north–south direction) to the Java Trench (Supplementary Fig. 1b and c), which may be caused by the stations being mainly distributed to the north on Java15,19. Similarly, since all seismometers are placed on the surface above the earthquakes, there are also shifts in the vertical direction (Supplementary Fig. 4). Following the hypocenter relocations, there is a significant reduction in travel-time residuals as depicted by the histograms of relative residuals (Supplementary Fig. 5), which indicates a better travel time fit for the new locations. Statistical uncertainties of the hypocentral parameters, which are also produced by the relocation, are shown in Supplementary Fig. 6.

By comparing the observed deformation field with long term plate motion models, the GPS data inversion results are able to reveal the present day strain accumulation process, which likely reflects a longer term build-up of strain energy (Fig. 3). Where the observed GPS deformation is less than the plate motion (slip deficit), the areas are inferred to be likely sources of future earthquakes. The area of strongest slip deficit is south of West Java (Fig. 3), which may be a potential source for a megathrust earthquake20. The inversion of GPS data from Central and East Java undertaken in this study shows similar features, i.e., two zones with slip deficits, albeit of lower magnitude compared to the west, which is unsurprising considering the differences in GPS velocities between the two regions (Fig. 3). The first high-slip deficit zone is located on the shallower part of the fault off the south coast of Central Java. The second high-slip deficit region is in the deeper part of the megathrust seismogenic zone off the south coast of East Java.

Figure 3
figure3
Interplate coupling models. (a) Slip deficit/excess along the Java Trench derived from GPS data that reflects the segmentation of the megathrust to the south of Java. Left: model derived by Hanifa et al.20; Right: model produced by this study. Black squares are superimposed to indicate where the estimated uncertainty is lower than the absolute value of the predicted slip deficit rate. See Supplementary Fig. 7b for an uncertainty map based on the posterior covariance matrix. Colour scale depicts the estimated slip-deficit rate (red) and the slip-excess rate/afterslip (blue). Dashed lines are contours of the top of the slab from the Slab 2.0 model18. Green squares depict the locations of GPS stations used by Hanifa et al.20 to constrain the model south of West Java, and the blue squares denote the locations of GPS stations used in this study to produce the model south of Central and East Java. Arrows show GPS velocities relative to the Sundaland block reference frame. Blue arrows represent the GPS velocities derived in this study after removing the postseismic deformation of the 2006 Java tsunami earthquake. Green arrows are GPS velocities taken from Hanifa et al.20. Note that most vectors are aligned in the direction of current plate motion. This could be an indication of strong seismic coupling to the south of the study area. The red areas of slip deficit indicate areas with increased potential for a great earthquake. These regions may rupture in individual events or together in the worst-case scenario. Plate motion is taken from the ITRF2014 model by Altamimi et al.5. (b) Same as (a) but with the epicenter distribution shown in Fig. 1b overlaid on the slip deficit model.

Full size image
The assumption that the areas of large slip deficit will correspond to areas of large seismic slip during future large earthquakes may turn out to be an over-simplification. Examples from other regions reveal a complicated relationship between geodetic measurements and slip during earthquakes21. However, we still feel that it is a useful exercise to investigate this scenario, since it does provide a means to estimate potential tsunami heights in the event of a future great earthquake. The approach and assumptions we adopt are similar to those used for the Nankai trough, where areas of strong geodetic coupling are assumed to be areas of large slip during earthquakes22.

If we adopt the above assumption, then the area of high slip deficit may rupture separately or together during an earthquake. The area of the deficit zone south of West Java is equivalent to a Mw 8.9 earthquake, assuming a return period of 400 years (consistent with Harris et al.13 and Okal23). For the same return period, the area of high slip deficit in Central and East Java is equivalent to a Mw 8.8 earthquake, whereas if both areas rupture in a single earthquake, it would produce a Mw 9.1 event.

To assess the potential tsunami heights along the south coast of Java we conducted tsunami modeling using several different scenarios. Hypothetical megathrust segments are available from the National Center for Earthquake Studies of Indonesia (see Supplementary Fig. 9), but in this study we used megathrust segments from our GPS data inversion, which we regard as more realistic since we estimated the expected amount of slip. Here, we carried out tsunami modeling with three different megathrust scenarios: (1) western Java segment only (Mw 8.9), (2) eastern Java segment, i.e., to the south of Central and East Java, only (Mw 8.8), and (3) western and eastern Java segments (Mw 9.1). The results of Scenarios 1 and 2, along with initial water heights for all three scenarios, are presented in Supplementary Figs. 10–12. The worst-case scenario (Scenario 3) with a return period of 400 years can generate a giant earthquake of Mw 9.1 and a very large tsunami with a maximum height of 20.2 m near the small islands to the south of Banten, the westernmost province of Java, at ~ 105.5°E (Fig. 4). We note that the tsunami heights can be even higher than modeled when slumping occurs, as has been suggested in the case of the 2018 M 7.5 Palu strike-slip earthquake in Sulawesi, East Indonesia, where submarine landslides may have contributed to tsunami generation24.

Figure 4
figure4
Modeled tsunami heights along the south coast of Java. This model is based on the worst-case scenario in which the modeled tsunami sources off the south coast of Java rupture at the same time. (a) Combined modeled tsunami sources off the south coast of Java from Scenarios 1 and 2. (b) Maximum tsunami height throughout model region over duration of simulation. (c) Maximum tsunami height along the south coast of Java.

Full size image
Discussion
Okal23 presented a detailed study of the 1921, 1937 and 1943 intraplate earthquakes south of Java, and found that the Java subduction zone lacks large interplate thrust events for the entire era of instrumental seismicity. However, he also remarked that this does not exclude the possibility that larger earthquakes occur over recurrence periods longer than the instrumental history, thereby leaving open the possibility that megathrust events will occur along the Java Trench. The results of our study, based on the seismic and GPS data, show that in the scenario we develop, there is high potential for megathrust events off the southern coast of Java, as suggested by the observed seismic gaps depicted in Figs. 1b and 2. The locations of the seismic gaps appear broadly consistent with the areas of slip deficit along the Java Trench as determined from interplate coupling models derived from GPS data (Fig. 3).

As acknowledged previously, seismic gaps may be caused by slow slip events that do not manifest seismically10,11, and the recent < 8 Mw events in 1994 and 2006 may represent the upper limit of earthquake size along the Java Trench. However, in light of recent megathrust events such as the 2004 Sumatera and 2011 Tohoku earthquakes, determining maximum moment release based on historic recordings or models can produce conservative estimates, and all subduction zones of sufficient length should be regarded as possible hosts of megathrust earthquakes24. In the case of the Java Trench, its potential in this regard is supported by a recent study13 that found tsunami deposits at many sites along the coastline facing the Java Trench, which lead the authors to conclude that megathrust earthquakes occur with a return period of approximately 500 years. Consequently, we believe that our models represent a plausible scenario, but acknowledge that the potential for slow slip and complexities in the relationship between slip deficit and earthquake rupture may also play a role in determining the likelihood of future great earthquakes.

The results of our tsunami modeling, performed using the tsunami sources derived from the GPS data, i.e., the interplate coupling models, show that the worst-case scenario (Scenario 3), where the tsunami sources off the south coast of Java all rupture at the same time, produces a tsunami height up to 20.2 m and 11.7 m in West and East Java, respectively. These maximum tsunami heights are similar to those obtained from Scenarios 1 and 2, but the combined tsunami sources increase the average tsunami height along the south coast of Java to ~ 4.5 m (Fig. 4). We note that the larger value in the west may in part be a consequence of the slip deficit modelling undertaken by Hanifa et al.20, which did not account for the effects of post-seismic deformation following the 2006 Mw7.8 earthquake, and hence should be regarded as an upper limit. Nevertheless, even if maximum wave heights in West Java are similar to those in East Java, they would pose a risk to densely populated cities in the region such as Pelabuhan Ratu.

Our multidisciplinary study, which includes seismic and geodetic data analyses and tsunami wave height modelling, clearly reveal the presence of seismic gaps off the southern coast of Java that could be the source of future great earthquakes with tsunamigenic potential. Although this is only one possible scenario, with mitigating circumstances such as slow slip potentially reducing the likelihood and severity of such an event, it nevertheless seems prudent to support recent calls13,25 for additional submarine and sea level instruments for the relatively sparse InaTEWS network in south Java, to help protect the many people living in the coastal areas.

Materials and methods
Data sources
The earthquake data used in this study were taken from the BMKG and ISC data catalogues. The GPS data were obtained from the Geospatial Information Agency of Indonesia and the Ministry of Agriculture and Spatial Planning/Land Administration Agency as part of the Indonesian Continuously Operating Reference Stations network. Plate motion and the bathymetry data were taken from Altamimi et al.5 and ETOPO16, respectively.

Double difference earthquake relocation
We used the teletomoDD algorithm, which is an extension of the double difference tomography method26 to teleseismic distances15. Following Pesicek et al.15, in this study we kept the initial seismic velocity model fixed and used the relocation capabilities only. Travel times were calculated using a 3D regional seismic velocity model of the Indonesian region with a grid size of 1° × 1°27 and the ak135 global 1D model28 for regions outside Indonesia. We employed the pseudo-bending ray tracing technique29 adapted for use in a spherical coordinate system by Koketsu and Sekine30. This ray tracing method allows for the prediction of local, regional, and teleseismic P- and S-wave arrival-time data, which enabled us to incorporate both BMKG data and data recorded by regional and global networks. The initial number of earthquakes available in our catalogue is 2312. However, prior to relocation, we implement selection criteria to eliminate poorly constrained events. The selection criteria are: (1) the events have at least 10 P- and S-phase arrival times, and (2) the azimuthal gaps are less than 210° for local/regional stations in the Indonesian network. A total of 2046 events passed the selection process and were subsequently relocated using the double difference approach. A total of 20 iterations of the double difference algorithm were applied, which yielded 1,898 well located events (see Figs. 1b and 2) and 148 poorly located events that were discarded from the final dataset.

The distribution of seismic stations used in this study, the epicentral shifts following event relocation, and a Rose diagram highlighting trends in the epicentral shifts are shown in Supplementary Fig. 1. In Supplementary Fig. 2 we plot the hypocenters of all events of Mw > 4.0 from the ISC-EHB catalogue from 1964 to 201616, which illustrates that the seismic gaps we identify south of Java are still present for this much larger dataset. Supplementary Fig. 4 displays a comparison between the BMKG hypocenters and those resulting from the teletomoDD relocation, the hypocenter shifts, as well as along-dip-distance of hypocentral shift as a function of azimuth. Supplementary Fig. 5 shows histograms of relative residuals before and after relocation, respectively. Here, we note that the histograms were constructed using the relative residual data of event pairs as required in the teletomoDD technique15 and not the absolute residual data of each event.

To estimate the location uncertainties associated with teletomoDD hypocenter results, we performed a jackknife resampling analysis31,32. Following Tichelaar and Ruff33 and Halpaap et al.34, we created a number of resampled datasets by removing a fixed number of our input data. In our case, we created 100 datasets by randomly deleting 10% of the differential travel-times data. We re-ran the hypocenter relocation using these datasets and computed the standard deviations of the earthquake locations. The average horizontal and depth uncertainties are 3.3 and 5.3 km, respectively (Supplementary Fig. 6).

GPS data processing
We used GPS data from 37 stations (see Fig. 3) located in central and eastern Java from 2008 to 2014, of which 20 are international GNSS stations. GAMIT/GLOBK software35,36 was used to analyze the daily solutions of the GPS recordings. The processing strategy for the GPS data follows the approach described in our previous study37. Final solutions of the GPS analysis are in the International Terrestrial Reference Frame (ITRF) 200838.

Gunawan et al.39 pointed out that the mainshock of the 2012 Mw 8.6 Indian Ocean earthquake affected global tectonic displacements as far away as Java. Thus, the GPS daily solutions in this study are corrected for the coseismic displacements of the 2012 earthquake. Daily solutions were then transformed into the Sundaland block reference frame based on the transformation parameters of Altamimi et al.5. From these GPS data, we generated velocity estimates by applying linear regression at each GPS station.

In the western part of the study area, an Mw 7.8 tsunamogenic earthquake occurred in 200640. Previous studies have suggested that the area around the mainshock continued to deform following the rupture due to postseismic deformation (e.g., Refs.41,42). In most cases, the mechanism of postseismic deformation associated with viscoelastic deformation generates a broader deformation area than afterslip43,44,45.

Modelling studies37,46 have suggested that the postseismic deformation of the 2006 earthquake involved a long duration of afterslip and a viscoelastic relaxation that affected Java12. We removed the effect of the postseismic deformation of the 2006 earthquake at each GPS station by employing afterslip and viscoelastic modelling as proposed by Gunawan et al.37. Thus, the ‘corrected’ velocities at each GPS station become the final data used for further analysis. Using the corrected velocity at each GPS station, we can then conduct slip deficit/excess modeling.

Figure 3 shows a map of GPS velocities for Central and East Java derived in this study after removing the postseismic deformation of the 2006 Java earthquake, together with GPS velocities for West Java derived by Hanifa et al.20, which have not been corrected for postseismic deformation. Most vectors point in the direction of current plate motion, indicating strong seismic coupling to the south of Java.

Slip deficit/excess modeling
Using the corrected velocity at each GPS station, we analyzed the slip deficit/excess in the central-eastern part of Java using the ‘backslip’ concept to characterise interseismic deformation at subduction zones47. In our study area, tectonically stable locations for analyzing slip deficit/excess are not available. Thus, we used an analysis of baseline length changes to calculate the slip deficit/excess of the fault plane along the Java Trench20,48,49.

In our analysis, we constructed a fault plane of 660 km length and 210 km width, which was discretized into 30 km × 30 km fault patches. Based on the Slab2.0 model for megathrust geometry18, we employed a dip angle of 16° from the surface to 52 km depth, and a dip angle of 34° for greater depths. The fault strike is assumed to be 278°, while the rake is 270°.

We designed a network of baselines by connecting pairs of GPS stations in this region using the same approach adopted by Hanifa et al.20. From the 37 continuous GPS stations, we produced 83 baselines. Using the ‘corrected’ velocities, we calculated the baseline rate changes. In our inversion analysis, we generated Green’s functions for each baseline using an elastic half-space model50. Since all other parameters are defined, the only unknown parameters are the magnitude of slip deficit/excess. In our slip inversion procedure, we employed a priori information in the form of smooth spatial variations with free boundary conditions along the trench and no-slip conditions for the other three fault plane edges (east, west, and north). The slip distribution was then estimated using Akaike’s Bayesian Information Criterion (ABIC)51,52,53. Supplementary Fig. 7a shows the variation of ABIC as a function of the hyperparameter (a dimensionless quantity that controls the relative weighting between fitting the data and the prior smoothness constraints), and the location of the best-fit model.

Using GPS data located in the western part of Java, Hanifa et al.20 estimate slip deficit/excess off the southwest coast of Java. In this study, we combine their findings and our new findings in a single plot (Fig. 3a). The combined results show a significant slip deficit/excess distribution along the Java Trench, which can be compared to the distribution of seismicity (see Fig. 3b). In Fig. 3a we superimpose black squares in regions where the absolute value of the slip deficit rate exceeds the model uncertainty. In the case of the eastern segment, this information is derived from the posterior covariance matrix, the diagonal elements of which are plotted in Supplementary Fig. 7b; for the western segment, the corresponding information is supplied by the study of Hanifa et al.20. The difference between data observations derived from GPS data and predictions from the slip deficit model are plotted in two ways—as velocity vectors with respect to reference stations in Supplementary Fig. 7c and as baseline change rates in Supplementary Fig. 8.

Based on the above results, the primary regions of slip deficit appear to be robust. We note that combining the GPS data from Hanifa et al.20 with the GPS data we processed to produce a single slip deficit model may result in potential inconsistencies since we have removed the effect of the postseismic deformation of the 2006 earthquake at each GPS station by employing afterslip and viscoelastic modelling as proposed by Gunawan et al.37, whereas they did not attempt to account for the effects of this event. Indeed, Hanifa et al.20 suggest that southward motion of station CPMK (see Fig. 3) is evidence of ongoing afterslip related to this Mw 7.8 earthquake, although whether it occurs inside the mainshock rupture area or in the adjacent downdip area cannot be determined. The reduced amplitudes of the anomalies on the eastern section compared to the western section may in part be a consequence of not accounting for this afterslip.

In terms of spatial resolution, Hanifa et al.20 use fault patches of size 12.5 × 12.5 km, which is considerably smaller than ours, but synthetic recovery tests demonstrate that at depths between 30 and 70 km, resolution is ~ 60 × 60 km or better, whereas at depths less than 30 km, it increases to as much as 250 km along strike, and 100 km down dip. A similar pattern of model resolution would also apply to the central-eastern segment recovered in this study.

Tsunami modeling
Based on the slip deficit/excess modeling results from the GPS data, we modeled the tsunami height and inundation based on several scenarios using the TUNAMI modelling code of Imamura54 and Imamura et al.55. We prepared a set of bathymetric and topographic data to construct a rectangular grid of points in latitude (5° to 14°S) and longitude (103° to 116°E) (Supplementary Fig. 10) based on the General Bathymetric Chart of the Oceans (GEBCO) 15 arc-second interval datasets (https://www.gebco.net56). The model domain, which is transformed to Cartesian coordinates, has 3120 and 2160 nodes in the x (longitude) and y (latitude) directions, respectively, with an equal grid spacing of 463 m. The vertical wall boundary condition is used at the coast, which does not allow for the transfer of momentum flux. This is a common boundary condition for tsunami modelling, which prevents on-shore inundation54. We used the long wave equation of Imamura54, which was solved using finite differences, to model tsunami propagation from three different source scenarios with various slip distributions. The first scenario is defined by 720 segments in West Java (Scenario 1 with an estimated magnitude of Mw 8.9), the second by 154 segments in East Java (Scenario 2, with an estimated magnitude of Mw 8.8) and the third a combination of scenarios 1 and 2 with an estimated magnitude of Mw 9.1, which is referred to as Scenario 3. The various slip distribution sources were modeled using an elastic deformation model50 for each segment. It was assumed that all segments ruptured simultaneously without any consideration of the rupture speed or finite rise time (Fig. 4). The model was run for 5 h to obtain maximum tsunami height along the south coast of Java.

The results of tsunami modeling based on slip deficit/excess results from the GPS data described above are presented in Supplementary Figs. 11 and 12. The resulting tsunami heights along the south coast of Java from Scenario 1 show that the maximum tsunami height is likely to occur in the region between 105° and 106°E, i.e., at the small islands located ~ 11 to 15 km from the nearest coast line where tsunami height can reach up to 20.2 m. This scenario yields an average tsunami height of 3.23 m along the south coast of Java (Supplementary Fig. 11). Based on Scenario 2, a maximum tsunami height of 11.7 m can occur at 113.65°E along the south coast of East Java. The broad rupture zones in this region have resulted in roughly similar peak tsunami heights along the coast between 110°E and 114°E compared to further west, but with a lower average tsunami height of 2.43 m (Supplementary Fig. 12). Wave-height uncertainty is not straight forward to estimate, but our results are largely consistent with those from Horspool et al.57, who undertook a probabilistic tsunami hazard assessment of Indonesia, in which they use a different finite difference code, source rupture model and bathymetry (30-arc second model from GEBCO). While our model is more detailed, the basic pattern of peak wave-heights along the south coast of Java is similar, with the largest amplitudes occurring in the west and an average maximum wave-height along the entire coast of between 4 and 5 m.

Abstract
Exposure to disasters and other extreme events is rising across the globe, but the impact on long-term mortality risks of affected populations is not established. We examine how mortality and individual-specific traumatic exposures at the time of the disaster affect mortality risks of survivors over the subsequent ten years, using data from Aceh, Indonesia, collected before and after the 2004 Indian Ocean tsunami. Across communities, the higher the percentage of individuals killed in the tsunami, the lower the mortality rate for adults over the subsequent decade. However, among older adults post-disaster mortality is elevated for males with poor post-tsunami psychosocial health and for females whose spouse died in the tsunami. Individual-specific tsunami exposures do not affect the mortality of younger adults within the ten-year time frame. Whereas positive mortality selection is evident for all adults, scarring is evident only for older adults and is large enough to substantively counteract the reductions in risk from positive mortality selection.

Main
Over the past 20 years, natural disasters have killed over a million people and exposed many more to trauma, displacement and the loss of family and livelihoods. As sea levels rise, storms and fires intensify, and populations inhabit increasingly vulnerable areas, these costs will increase, placing a premium on advancing our understanding of how extreme events shape population well-being over the long term. Many studies describe the immediate impacts of disasters, but evidence is scarce regarding how the costs of disasters evolve over the longer term. We focus on mortality after the 2004 Indian Ocean tsunami, documenting that the failure to analyse longer-term impacts understates the disaster’s costs. In the first few years after the tsunami, mortality was lower among survivors who had directly experienced the tsunami than among those who did not, indicating positive survival selection. Ten years after the disaster, the pattern among older men reversed as stresses associated with scarring from the experience took their toll. Short-term assessments of the mortality impacts of other similar disasters are potentially misleading if they fail to incorporate the longer-term impacts on population health.

Insights from biology and demography inform our analysis. At the population level, whether stressful events elevate mortality risks for survivors relative to an unexposed population depends on how stress exposure affects the postexposure health of individuals and on the distribution of frailty among the exposed relative to the unexposed1. Stress exposure may harm health and elevate mortality during and immediately after an event. Such effects have been documented after large-scale disasters2,3,4, but whether exposures scar survivors in ways that increase mortality risks over the longer term has not been established. Conversely, if the event kills some of the exposed, survivors may be selected for characteristics that confer a survival advantage relative to those who were not exposed.

Not only do the relative magnitudes of the effects of scarring and mortality selection have important implications for subsequent population health, but those effects probably vary with time since exposure5. Although natural selection after extreme events has been documented in the animal world6,7, there is limited scientific evidence on these processes over the longer term in contemporary human populations8. Evidence of early-life exposure to large-scale adverse events on late-life mortality is mixed. For example, studies of the 1918 influenza pandemic using data from the United States indicate that mortality is elevated among those exposed in the third trimester or at birth, but other work suggests that selective fertility may explain these cohort differences. Evidence from Sweden and 24 other developed countries indicates no excess mortality among exposed cohorts9,10,11,12.

The paucity of evidence of the impact of adverse events experienced in adulthood on mortality over the longer term is an important gap in the literature. Studies have established that large-scale adverse events kill the frailest, resulting in positive mortality selection in the short term. Here we provide evidence for mortality among adults ten years after exposure to the Indian Ocean tsunami and document the emerging importance of scarring as time passes that, for some, reverses the short-term positive survival selection13.

The event
The Indian Ocean tsunami occurred on December 26, 2004, as a result of a massive megathrust earthquake in the Indian Ocean. The 1,500 km rupture generated tsunami waves that impacted shorelines throughout the region and propagated wave energy into all other world oceans14,15. Worldwide casualties totalled over 250,000. The western coastline of the Indonesian province of Aceh was the area hit hardest. Tsunami waves ranging up to 35 m struck Aceh’s shore some 15 min after the quake16,17.

The tsunami was unexpected. The risk of a tsunami was thought to be low because no historic precedent for the rupture was known and the plates involved were moving slowly18. Evidence from sediment cores indicates that before 2004 the last tsunami to hit mainland Sumatra occurred more than 600 years ago17.

In Aceh, over 160,000 people, roughly 5% of the population, perished. Some communities lost most of their residents, while in nearby communities everyone survived. The height, force and inland reach of water from the tsunami depended on topographical features of the ocean floor and the shoreline19,20. Low-lying coastal communities were largely destroyed in some areas. Along riverways, the water encroached as much as 9 km, versus 3–4 km in other nearby locations20. Inland areas that were flooded sustained substantial damage to the environment but few deaths.

Study design
At least three major challenges hamper the identification of long-run effects of exposure to stress on mortality at the population level. First, most studies look for an event’s fingerprints on later-life health and mortality by inferring exposure from location21. If location at the time of exposure is related to other factors that affect health and mortality, such as poverty or risk-taking behaviours, it is difficult to disentangle exposure effects from those other factors. In many of these studies, only a selected fraction of the subjects were actually exposed to the stressor, which further complicates the interpretation of the results22,23.

Second, studies that attempt to measure exposure at the individual level rely on recall that sometimes reaches back many years and is potentially unreliable. This concern may be minor for rare and extreme events, but it is salient for frequent events such as storms, floods, droughts and fires24. Third, few studies are designed to be population representative, which complicates inferences about population health.

Turning to the biology of scarring, studies have traced physiological pathways and established that experiencing a physically threatening event that creates feelings of fear, horror and helplessness can elevate disease risk if the mechanisms underlying threat responses are overtaxed and fail to return to normal when the danger subsides25,26. Studies of animal models provide causal evidence that traumatic exposures activate the neuroendocrine, cardiovascular and gastrointestinal systems and alter pain sensitivity and immune function27. Studies of humans who develop post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD) after surviving rape, torture or war provide additional evidence that traumatic experiences are associated both with altered functioning of many physiological systems and with elevated mortality risks26,28. However, in observational studies it is difficult to adjust for other individual-specific characteristics that both affect PTSD and alter physiological responses linked to mortality, which complicates drawing causal inferences from these studies. These issues are probably magnified when exposure reports are unreliable.

Our research directly addresses the difficulties associated with empirical analyses of mortality selection and scarring over the longer term. We investigate the impact of stress exposures on mortality a decade after the 2004 Indian Ocean earthquake and tsunami. This disaster is one of the largest in history. Along the coast of Aceh, Indonesia, the tsunami devastated some areas, whereas other, comparable areas were not directly affected. Drawing on uniquely rich population-representative longitudinal data collected before and at multiple points after the tsunami, the Study of the Tsunami Aftermath and Recovery (STAR), we use the natural experiment of the tsunami to identify the disaster’s impact on mortality over the long term.

Building on studies of mortality at the time of the tsunami29 and in the subsequent five years13, we use data from STAR to document variation in mortality risks in the decade after the disaster as a function of exposure to the disaster at the community and individual levels. The baseline, a socio-economic survey (SUSENAS) conducted nine months before the tsunami by Statistics Indonesia, is population representative at the district level. Beginning five months after the tsunami, we reinterviewed surviving baseline respondents annually for five years and then again roughly ten years after the event. We focus on mortality in the decade after the tsunami among 5,927 individuals (from 334 baseline communities) who were ages 35 and older at the time of the tsunami and who survived to the first post-tsunami interview. Face-to-face interviews were completed with 97.8% of this group in the ten years after the disaster (0.5% refused and 1.7% were not found). This unprecedented reinterview rate for a large-scale, population-representative study reflects well-developed tracking protocols, high-quality fieldwork and committed enumerators.

Our research design has five key strengths. First, because the baseline is population representative and our reinterview rates are almost 98%, the sample is effectively representative of all survivors. Few large-scale post-disaster studies represent the entire at-risk population, and none has achieved such high retention rates.

Second, because the tsunami was sudden and unexpected and the impacts were locally idiosyncratic, respondents’ exposures were outside their control and unrelated to pre-existing characteristics, conditional on living along the coast of Aceh13,29. This exogeneity addresses a major challenge in the literature: disentangling the effects of exposure from the effects of selection of those exposed.

Third, over 300 STAR communities encompass tsunami-related exposures that span the spectrum from high levels of mortality (>15% of the population) and near-complete community destruction to no direct impacts, although some were indirectly affected by, for example, the loss of access to markets. To this end, whereas most disaster studies are localized, STAR is designed to include communities directly exposed to the tsunami and communities that were not directly exposed but are plausibly comparable.

Fourth, STAR measures multiple dimensions of exposure with high validity and specificity soon after the disaster. For example, we ask whether respondents were caught up in the water, were injured or saw others drown. Variation in the degree of exposure depends on the same characteristics as the incidence of exposure and is therefore also plausibly exogenous in our models of mortality.

Fifth, we examine the relationship between exposure and mortality over ten years—far longer than most other research in the field and a period potentially sufficient for exposure-driven changes in health to emerge, including elevated mortality risks. Finally, exploiting annual post-disaster surveys, we examine how the effects of individuals’ experiences as the waves came ashore are moderated by experiences during the two years after the tsunami.

This natural experiment design harnesses variation across locations at the time of the tsunami in the community-level mortality rate and in individual-specific experiences during the disaster. The key identifying assumption is that groups differentially exposed to the disaster would have, in the absence of the disaster, experienced similar post-disaster mortality trajectories.

Relationship between mortality and stress exposures
We first examine whether, at the community level, mortality in the ten years after the tsunami varies as a function of the community-specific tsunami-related mortality rate. Variation across STAR communities in the fraction of the population killed in the tsunami ranges from none in 59.3% of the communities to more than two-thirds of adults in the most devastated communities (Table 1). Turning to subsequent mortality, 17.1% of those who were ages 35 years and older at the time of the tsunami died over the next ten years. Among survivors from communities in which at least 5% perished, the mortality rate is 13.8%, versus 17.4% for those from communities with no mortality (we focus on those 35 and older because among those younger than 35 years, only 2% died by 2015).

Table 1 Mortality at and after the tsunami
Full size table
Figure 1 displays the relationship between the percentage of tsunami survivors who died in the subsequent ten years and mortality on the day of the tsunami in the community in which the survivor was living at the time of the disaster. The relationship is negative, strong and roughly linear. Individuals who were living at the time of the tsunami in communities where high fractions of the population perished but who themselves survived are, on average, less likely to die in the ensuing ten years, indicating positive selection in terms of characteristics associated with longevity.

Fig. 1: Relationship between community-level tsunami mortality and percentage of tsunami survivors who died between 2005 and 2015.
figure1
Tsunami survivors are linked to their pre-tsunami community of residence.

Full size image
This aggregate result masks important individual-level heterogeneity, and so we turn to survivors’ individual-specific experiences during and immediately after the tsunami, which we measured in post-tsunami interviews. Our first set of measures of exposure at the time of the tsunami reflects experiences that potentially produce feelings of helplessness and horror and that have been linked with symptoms of post-traumatic stress30. We ask whether the respondent was caught up in the water, was injured or watched friends or family struggle or disappear in the waves. An affirmative answer to any of these questions is treated as our first direct exposure, which affected 12.6% of the survivors (Table 2). Our other immediate exposure measures capture loss of family: whether the tsunami killed an individual’s spouse (4%) or an individual’s parent, sibling or child, whether or not that person was coresident (15.9%).

Table 2 Exposure to stressors among tsunami survivors
Full size table
A summary indicator of the impact of the stressors of the tsunami is created using the severity of symptoms of post-traumatic stress reactivity (PTSR) when, according to the respondent, the symptoms were most severe after the tsunami. An indicator is coded as 1 for respondents whose score was above 11 (17.8% of respondents), on a 21-point scale constructed from seven items from the PTSD Checklist Civilian Version31,32.

All of these indicators are measured in the first post-tsunami survey, which was conducted 5 to 16 months after the tsunami, except for a small fraction of respondents (less than 3%), for whom the first post-tsunami interview took place during the second follow-up, 18 to 24 months after the tsunami.

Finally, post-tsunami displacement during the 24 months after the disaster is measured with an indicator identifying the 13.8% of respondents who resided in a tent, camp or barracks during this period. This measure draws on data collected in the first three annual post-tsunami follow-ups.

Results
We investigate how the mortality of survivors ten years after the tsunami is affected by exposures at the community and individual levels during and after the tsunami. Our multivariable regressions also include individual-level controls for pre-tsunami background characteristics. These include age in years, marital status, years of education and height. The models are estimated with the method of ordinary least squares, and the linear probably estimates, multiplied by 100, are interpreted as percentage effects. (An additional description of the data and methods is provided in the Methods.)

We investigate death between the first post-tsunami interview (which occurred in 2005 or 2006) and the ten-year follow-up in 2014–2015: 16.2% of our study population (at least 35 years old at the tsunami) died in this period. We examine mortality overall and disaggregated by age and gender.

Table 3 presents the regression results. Paralleling Fig. 1, the evidence for positive mortality selection is clear. The risk of death falls for all adults as the level of mortality in their pre-tsunami community rises (column 1), even after controlling for individual-specific exposures. In fact, the only exposure associated with elevated mortality is living in a camp, tent or barracks after the disaster, and that is driven by variation across communities, as it is not statistically significant in models with community fixed effects (column 2).

Table 3 Post-tsunami mortality between the first interview (2005–06) and 2015
Full size table
These relationships vary substantially across demographic groups, perhaps because mortality at the tsunami varied by age and sex, so that mortality selection varies across the groups29. Results are reported for younger males (columns 3 and 4) and females (columns 5 and 6). Community-level mortality is a significant predictor of subsequent mortality among younger males, but not among younger females. There is, however, evidence of positive mortality selection among younger females who lost a parent, sibling or child in the tsunami: those females are less likely to die in the subsequent ten years. This effect is reduced and not significant after taking into account community fixed effects. The loss of close kin probably marks young women who survived the tsunami because they were relatively strong and indicates that they have attributes that are protective relative to the general population. Among younger adults there is no evidence of scarring effects of individual-level exposures.

Among older adults (columns 7–10), evidence of both mortality selection and scarring emerges. An increase of one percentage point in the community-level tsunami mortality rate is associated with a decrease in the risk of death of almost a quarter of a percentage point for both older males and older females, although the estimate is statistically significant only for males. (It is also statistically significant for males and females taken together.)

At the same time, there is evidence for scarring among older males who report high levels of PTSR: they are much more likely to die in the decade after the tsunami than are those who do not. The effect is large—an increase in mortality of almost nine percentage points—and statistically significant. An effect of a similar magnitude is evident for older females who lost a spouse in the tsunami. That effect is slightly larger when adjusting for community fixed effects but is statistically significant at a level of P = 0.09. Older females who lived in a tent, barracks or camp are also more likely to die in the subsequent ten years; this effect is significant in the model without a community fixed effect (column 9).

Climate change in combination with patterns of population growth and distribution will increasingly expose human populations to extreme events. We document the consequences of such exposure for longer-term human mortality risks at the population level, drawing on an event that created exogenous stressors and taking into account the forces of both mortality selection and scarring. The Indian Ocean tsunami was sudden and unexpected, with enormous costs in lives lost and physical destruction.

The impact of positive mortality selection is clear: survivors who at the time of the disaster were living in communities where tsunami mortality was high have lower mortality over the subsequent ten years than do individuals from communities where tsunami mortality was lower. The impact is larger for individuals who were 50 or older at the time of the tsunami than for younger individuals, and the signal is stronger and more precisely determined for males than for females.

High-stress, individual-specific experiences also have strong impacts on mortality risks of older adults, but in the opposite direction, indicating that scarring effects play an important role over the long term. Between 2006 and 2015, males 50 years and older at the time of the tsunami with relatively high levels of PTSR in the two years after the disaster are almost nine percentage points more likely to have died than their counterparts with lower levels of PTSR. For older females, losing a spouse in the disaster and living in a tent, barracks or camp are associated with substantially elevated subsequent mortality risks. The effects of scarring on mortality were not evident five years after the tsunami, either because the effects were modest or because they were dominated by positive mortality selection in the shorter term, underscoring the value of longer-term follow-ups.

Among younger adults, there is no evidence that individual exposure measures raise mortality risks in the decade after the tsunami. The absence of such effects is unlikely to be driven by the dominance of mortality selection, at least for females, for whom there is little evidence of positive selection. Rather, it is plausible that the effects of scarring and possibly also selection will emerge only as this generation ages.

This study illustrates the importance of long-term longitudinal data from a representative sample enumerated before the event and for which mortality from the event is known. By linking people to their original communities, we see clearly the importance of positive mortality selection in reduced risks of death over the next ten years, and we are able to examine the impacts of exposures taking into account that positive selection.

Impacts a full decade after the event differ from and are stronger than patterns after five years13. In the first five years after the disaster, positive mortality selection is evident for males, particularly older ones, but scarring from individual exposures is difficult to detect for any group. In fact, direct exposure to the waves and the death of close kin seem to reduce mortality for older males, probably because these indicators are relatively precise identifiers of individuals who were sufficiently fit to survive extreme stressors. In contrast, when the observation period is ten years, the signal from the community-level mortality rate is strong, and net of that impact, the negative impacts of exposure emerge more clearly for particular subsets of older individuals.

Discussion
The Indian Ocean tsunami was a major natural disaster, exacting a death toll of over 160,000 as the waves came ashore in Aceh, Indonesia. The frail were more likely to die during the event, resulting in positive mortality selection among survivors. Those who were living in communities where tsunami-related mortality was higher were less likely to die, both in the short run and during the following ten years. After ten years, however, the effects of scarring from individual-specific exposures to the tsunami had emerged among older adults, counteracting reductions in risk from positive mortality selection.

This evidence has implications for populations exposed to other natural and man-made disasters. Adverse exposures have the potential to result in higher mortality in exposed populations over the long term. More broadly, our results with respect to the impact of elevated levels of post-traumatic stress at the time of the tsunami underscore the reach of compromised psychosocial health in the aftermath of these events for population health and well-being years into the future.

These implications probably pertain to other high-mortality disasters including the 2008 Sichuan earthquake in China, the 2010 Haiti earthquake and the 2011 Tohoku earthquake and tsunami in Japan. Moreover, it is possible that in our context, the negative long-term effects we document are mitigated by the successful reconstruction programme that contributed to substantial post-tsunami economic growth for the population of Aceh. In contexts where reconstruction efforts have been less successful (as in Haiti after the 2010 earthquake, for example) or where resources have not reached the most vulnerable (as in some of those affected by Hurricane Katrina in 2005, for example)32,33, stressful exposures may matter more than in Aceh. Furthermore, scarring may take an even greater toll on population health after low-mortality adverse events, including those for which stress probably accumulates more slowly over time, such as events caused by climate change, epidemics and conflict.

Finally, our evidence suggests that the tsunami will influence the demography of the affected region for years to come. The tsunami changed the population composition both with respect to the age and sex distribution of surviving members29 and with respect to characteristics associated with longevity. Additional forces acting on population composition include fertility and migration behaviours, both of which we have shown to change in the aftermath of the tsunami34,35. The research underscores the critical importance of rigorously designed long-term follow-ups of populations in the aftermath of adverse events for understanding their full impact on societies33.

Methods
Sample, survey and measurement of survival status
STAR is designed to address several limitations of studies based on post-disaster data collected about individuals who are identified as affected after the event and typically live near the site of the disaster. First, the STAR study area includes communities directly affected by the tsunami, nearby communities that were not directly affected and communities as much as several hundred kilometres away from tsunami-damaged communities. Because the tsunami was unanticipated and its impacts were locally idiosyncratic, community-level exposure to the tsunami is plausibly exogenous with respect to other population factors that affect health and mortality.

The STAR sample is drawn from a pre-tsunami baseline and is representative of the population at risk of exposure. The baseline is drawn from the February/March 2004 wave of SUSENAS, a large socio-economic survey conducted by Statistics Indonesia that is population representative at the kabupaten (district) level. STAR includes every 2004 SUSENAS enumeration area in 11 districts of Aceh province with coastlines vulnerable to tsunami inundation; the STAR sample includes all members of all households in these enumeration areas and is thus representative of the population living in these districts. SUSENAS is widely used and considered high quality (participation rates exceed 99%). Information on demographic and socio-economic characteristics of every household member is collected from a key household informant. That information forms the STAR baseline. STAR sought to determine the survival status of every baseline household member and reinterview every surviving member in the post-tsunami follow-ups.

We focus on adults enumerated in the pre-tsunami baseline who were 35 years or older at the time of the tsunami. The goal of the first post-tsunami survey, conducted between May 2005 and April 2006, was to determine the survival status of everyone in the baseline sample and to locate and interview each of the survivors. To accurately ascertain the survival status of each respondent whom we could not reinterview, we triangulated across multiple sources of information, including interviews with household and family members, community leaders and neighbours, who provide essential information about households for which we did not locate any original members because they had all died. Over two-thirds of the population had perished in the hardest-hit communities. In every post-tsunami wave of STAR, we checked the survival status of those who had not been interviewed, sought to reinterview every surviving respondent and tracked and interviewed in their new location those who had moved since the last interview.

We conducted five annual follow-ups, each of which took about a year to complete, so that we were effectively permanently in the field from May 2005 through November 2010. The sixth follow-up was conducted ten years after the tsunami between September 2014 and December 2015 (some tracking cases were completed in 2016). The survival status of every target respondent was determined in each wave, and if a respondent was thought to have died, that was confirmed in subsequent surveys.

Of 6,850 target adult respondents in the pre-tsunami baseline, we have determined the survival status for 6,792 (>99%): 768 died at or before the tsunami, and 97 died after the tsunami but before the first STAR follow-up, leaving 5,927 survivors at that time. They are the respondents who are the focus of this study, in which we use their survival status at the time of the ten-year follow-up. The average hiatus between the first and ten-year follow-up is 9.2 years.

Measurement of key covariates
Mortality rates at the community level are calculated using mortality measured for all baseline respondents in STAR. Individual-level exposures are constructed from interviews with those who survived. In the first post-tsunami follow-up, each adult respondent provided detailed information about their direct exposure at the time of the tsunami (being caught up in the water, being injured or watching others struggle), death of a spouse, death of other family (whether or not those people were coresident at the time), whether the respondent had moved or was displaced, and when the respondent moved and to where. Each respondent also reported their experiences of symptoms that cover three distinctive psychological domains of PTSR: re-experiencing the event, avoidance and numbing, and hyperarousal. Reports of the presence and intensity (on a scale of 0 to 3) of each symptom at the most intense point since the tsunami are used to construct an individual-specific PTSR score36, which ranges from 0 to 21 and increases with the number and intensity of symptoms.

In the first follow-up, fewer than 3% of respondents were not found, and another 5% were not individually assessed. We use responses to the same questions asked in the second follow-up (conducted from June 2006 through May 2007) to construct measures of exposure at the time of the tsunami and symptoms used to create the PTSR scores for these respondents. As expected, an indicator for these cases is not significant in any of the models since recall error is unlikely to be important given the salience of the exposures and symptoms24.

Migration histories were collected in every follow-up and are used to construct a measure of displacement in any period during the 24 months after the tsunami. In addition, height was measured for the first time in the second follow-up, so it was not measured for the 83 people who died between the first and second follow-ups. The models include an indicator variable identifying these people.

Regression models
We analyse a binary dependent variable, θic, which takes the value 1 if the tsunami survivor i who was living in community c at the time of the tsunami died during the period and 0 if the individual survived the period:

θic=α+βMc+λTic+γXic+εic
(1)
where α is the intercept term and β, λ and γ are the regression coefficients associated with the covariates. We include Mc, the tsunami mortality rate in the respondent’s pre-tsunami community, which controls for the extent to which the population was affected by tsunami mortality. The vector of covariates Tic consists of the five individual-specific measures of tsunami exposures. The vector Xic includes six individual background characteristics, all measured at the time of the pre-tsunami baseline: age (indicators for each year of age), sex, whether the respondent was married, education and a measure of household resources, per capita household expenditure. We also control for height because taller and presumably stronger people were more likely to survive the tsunami. Unobserved heterogeneity is captured by εic.

By controlling for the tsunami mortality rate in the community, we capture one aspect of how the tsunami changed communities. Communities with high mortality experienced other changes as well, such as environmental destruction. An alternative to controlling for the mortality rate is to estimate the model with a fixed effect for each community of residence at the time of the tsunami. In that case, the estimates can be interpreted as the impacts of differences in individual-specific exposures among respondents within each community:

θic=α+λTic+γXic+μc+ζic
(2)
where μc is a community-specific fixed effect, which is operationalized by treating each enumeration area as a community. This effect absorbs the influence of all community-specific variation that does not change after the first post-tsunami wave and that affects mortality risks in a linear and additive way. This includes, for example, damage in the community because of the earthquake and tsunami, indirect impacts of the tsunami (including in areas that were not directly affected by the tsunami), pre-tsunami levels of infrastructure and economic activity in the community, and the socio-economic status of the community before the tsunami. Unobserved heterogeneity is captured by ζic.

Linear probability models are estimated using the method of ordinary least squares for two reasons. First, with fixed effects, nonlinear models (such as the logit or probit) suffer from the incidental parameters problem and yield biased and inconsistent estimates37. In contrast, linear probability estimates are consistent with and without fixed effects, but errors are not homoscedastic. We take heteroscedasticity into account in the estimation of the variance–covariance matrix along with correlations in unobserved characteristics, εic and ζic, at the community level. Second, because we use the same model with and without fixed effects, the estimates are directly comparable. They are also straightforward to interpret as the marginal effects of covariates on mortality.

Abstract
As many as seven tsunamis from the past 8000 years are evidenced by sand sheets that rest on buried wetland soils at Badabalu, southern Andaman Island, along northern part of the fault rupture of the giant 2004 Aceh-Andaman earthquake. The uppermost of these deposits represents the 2004 tsunami. Underlying deposits likely correspond to historical tsunamis of 1881, 1762, and 1679 CE, and provide evidence for prehistoric tsunamis in 1300–1400 CE, in 2000–3000 and 3020–1780 BCE, and before 5600–5300 BCE. The sequence includes an unexplained hiatus of two or three millennia ending around 1400 CE, which could be attributed to accelerated erosion due to Relative Sea-Level (RSL) fall at ~3500 BP. A tsunami in 1300–1400, comparable to the one in 2004, was previously identified geologically on other Indian Ocean shores. The tsunamis assigned to 1679, 1762, and 1881, by contrast, were more nearly confined to the northeast Indian Ocean. Sources have not been determined for the three earliest of the inferred tsunamis. We suggest a recurrence of 420–750 years for mega-earthquakes having different source, and a shorter interval of 80–120 years for large magnitude earthquakes.

Introduction
The societal impact from tsunamis is extremely catastrophic. Two recent tsunamis triggered by 2004 Sumatra-Andaman (Mw 9.3) and 2011 Tohoku (Mw 9.1) mega- earthquakes along subduction zones have exhibited our poor understanding about their occurrences, characteristic wave patterns, and sediment transport1,2,3. Reliable information pertaining to such events, which can be obtained from geological records, is crucial to minimize the consequent disaster. The Andaman and Nicobar Islands, and coastal areas along the Mainland India (as well as Indonesia and Thailand) are vulnerable to tsunamis generated from earthquakes originating from different sources that exist along the Sumatra Subduction Zone (SUSZ), Andaman Subduction Zone (ANSZ) and Arakan Subduction Zone (ARSZ) (Fig. 1a). Therefore, these are the best locations to study detailed aspects of tsunami events.

Figure 1
figure1
(a) Regional tectonic map of Sumatra-Andaman region along with the extent of ruptures and earthquakes (with magnitude) occurring between AD1600–2004. The map was generated using Generic Mapping Tool (GMT). Fault lines, earthquake rupture areas, earthquakes listed with magnitude are adopted from Malik et al.3; Monecke et al.3; Meltzner et al.10,12. Sumatra Subduction Zone (SUSZ), Andaman Subduction Zone (ANSZ) and Arakan Subduction Zone (ARSZ). Black box shows the area of Andaman Island of Fig. 1b. (b) Map of Andaman Islands showing areas of uplift and subsidence triggered by the 2004 event (after Malik et al.3). Black box shows the location of (c,d). (c) Google image of the area around Badabalu along the south coast of Andaman showing intact beach, beach-ridge and back-marsh before the 2004 event. The image was taken on 09 April 2004 (Map data: Google, DigitalGlobe). (d) Google image showing the effect of the 2004 Sumatra-Andaman earthquake. The land subsidence was ~40–45 cm, resulted in inundation and erosion of coastline, as well as inland migration of beach, beach-ridge and back-marsh. The image was taken on 01 May 2014 (Map data: Google, CNES/Airbus). White dashed line marks the WNW-ESE striking transect along which topographic profile, as well as stratigraphic sections, were collected. Geoslice locations are indicated as GS1 to GS10 and trenches as T1 to T3.

Full size image
The 26 December 2004 tsunamigenic earthquake took more than 280,000 lives. A large coseismic rupture of ~1300 km4,5,6 occurred along the SUSZ and ANSZ, and resulted in dramatic land-level changes marked by prominent uplift and subsidence along the west and east coast of Andaman and Nicobar Islands (Fig. 1a,b)3,6,7. Historical earthquakes preceded the 2004 earthquake in 1679, 1762, 1847, 1881, and 1941 (?) (Fig. 1a). Lack of comprehensive historical data poses a big challenge for a proper tsunami hazard evaluation for the Andaman and Nicobar Islands as well as the east coast of Mainland India. A poor understanding of such catastrophic events implies a huge risk associated with the failure of existing/upcoming nuclear power plants and life-line infrastructure near the densely populated coastal areas in India. Also, lesson learnt from the Tohoku earthquake and associated tsunami necessitates identification of tsunamis generated from local source(s) along the Andaman-Arakan or Sumatra segment. Even earthquakes with large magnitude should not be underestimated, which could be devastative as experienced during the recent 28 September 2018, Palu tsunami in Indonesia, produced by a Mw7.5 earthquake.

Barring a few studies, not much information on paleoseismic and paleo-tsunami is available3,6,7,8,9,10,11,12,13. A recent study based on turbidites reveals 6600 year earthquake history from the Sumatra-Andaman Subduction Zone14. In addition to the 2004 Sumatra-Andaman earthquake (Mw 9.3) and the associated giant tsunami, several other tsunami events occurred during the medieval period CE 850–900, CE 660–880, CE 1100–1300, CE 1679, and CE 17623. Of these, the CE 660–880 and CE 1100–1300 were unusual events (mega earthquakes 9.0 ≥ Mw ≤ 9.5) triggered along the Andaman-Arakan and Andaman segments respectively, and generated transoceanic tsunamis3. These events were similar to the 2004 Sumatra-Andaman earthquake in terms of magnitude, rupture length and in producing giant tsunami. In this study, we present geological signatures of at least seven tsunamis over the past 8000 years obtained from shallow stratigraphic sections retrieved from 10 geoslices and 3 trenches at Badabalu, along the south coast of Andaman Island (Fig. 1b–d). A compilation of all available paleoseismic and paleo-tsunami events reported from Andaman and Nicobar Islands and areas adjoining the Indian Ocean like Burma, Thailand, Indonesia and Sri Lanka, are summarized in Supplementary Table S1 3,4,5,6,7,8,9,10,11,12,13,14,15,16,17.

The ENE-WSW striking Badabalu beach along the south coast of Andaman is a famous tourist destination (Fig. 1b,c). The Badabalu area was severely affected by the 2004 tsunami (Sumatra-Andaman earthquake) and experienced a coseismic subsidence of ~40–45 cm (Supplementary Fig. S1.1a–h). Google Earth images from 2004 to 2014 clearly exhibit the pre- and post-seismic changes in coastal geomorphology (Fig. 1c,d, Supplementary Figs. S1.1a–h and S1.2a,b).

According to the survivors, the Badabalu area experienced ~4 m high tsunami waves, with run-up up to 0.8–1.0 km from the coast. Coseismic subsidence resulted into a landward shifting of the beach by 35–50 m (Supplementary Figs. S1.1a–h and S1.2a,b). Landward migration of the beach also caused inundation of the area and formation of beach ridge, back-marsh inland, and dead forest along the coastline. Local residents artificially filled the area by 0.7–0.8 m, shifted their houses to the higher ground, and elevated the coastal roads to avoid inundation around residential area and agricultural fields during high-tides (Supplementary Figs. S1.2–S1.4).

Results
Stratigraphy
Based on the sedimentary structure, grain size, depositional and/or erosional contacts observed in litho-sections, 19 litho-units (a’, a-r, from top to bottom) were identified (Figs. 2b, 3 and 4; Supplementary Data S2; Figs. S2.1–S2.4, Tables S2 and S5.1). Unit-a’ is the youngest lithounit, represent present day beach-ridge facies. Unit-a is present-day peaty soil (humic), medium-fine sand observed from the back-marsh. Unit-b is 2004 tsunami yellowish medium-coarse sand. It is coarser and thicker near to the coast, and becomes thinner and finer towards inland (Fig. 1c, 2b, 3a,c and 4c,d; Supplementary Figs. S2.1–S2.4). It shows sharp contact with Unit-c, a peaty soil in the back-marsh that existed during 2004 event (Figs. 2b, 3a,c and 4b–d; Supplementary Figs. S2.1–S2.4). Unit-d is yellowish medium-coarse sand, with few broken shells and coral clasts. It shows a sharp contact with Unit-e. It seems that similar condition like 2004 existed at the time of deposition of Unit-d by historic tsunami over Unit-e, representing a wetland soil (Figs. 2b, 3b and 4b–d; Supplementary Fig. S2.3a,b). Unit-f is fine silty-sand, represents the phase of basin-filling (Figs. 2b, 3c and 4b–d; Supplementary Figs. S2.1–S2.4). Unit-g, comprising of medium-coarse sand, broken shell fragments, and angular coral clasts, shows bi-directional structure and sharp contact with Unit-h (partially developed peat) suggests that the Unit-g was associated with a tsunami (Figs. 2b, 3d and 4c,d, Supplementary Figs. S2.2–S2.4). This event caused subsidence as marked by the overlying finer Unit-f.

Figure 2
figure2
(a) Topographic profile collected along WNW-ESE transect (refer Fig. 1d for location). Locations of geoslices and trenches for shallow stratigraphic record are marked along the profile. The area shows beach ridge-swale-beach ridge topography. The middle portion of the profile shows artificial fill by local residents to prevent inundation. LLT – lower low tide, MSL – mean sea level and HHT – higher high tide. (b) Geoslice and trench sections placed with respect to horizontal. The vertical scale represents depth from the surface. The distribution of all exposed sedimentary lithounits was correlated. Based on the sedimentary characteristics the exposed units were classified into total 19 units, from the youngest Unit-a’ to the oldest Unit-r. In total seven tsunami deposits (including 2004 tsunami) were identified from the exposed stratigraphic sequence ranging in depth from 160–270 cm. Units b, d, g, l, n, p and r represents tsunami deposits marked by yellow colour.

Full size image
Figure 3
figure3
(a) Close-up view of 2004 tsunami deposit (Unit-b) and underlying peaty soil (Unit-c) exposed in GS6. Unit-b is marked by inversely graded yellowish medium-coarse sand with broken shells. It also shows prominent laminations, and a sharp contact with underlying unit (Unit-c). (b) Close-up view of Units d, e and g exposed in GS7. Unit-d (paleo-tsunami) comprises coarse to medium sand with fine gravel clasts and broken shell fragments. It shows bi-directional structure with normal to inverse grading and a sharp contact with underlying peaty unit (Unit-e). Unit-g comprises coarse to medium sand with broken shell and coral fragments. It shows inverse grading and bi-directional structure. (c) In GS4, the upper portion of the stratigraphy shows a thin layer of medium sand representing 2004 tsunami sandwiched between pre- (Unit-c) and post- (Unit-a) 2004 event peaty soils. Unit-b shows sharp contacts with underlying (Unit-c) and overlying (Unit-a) units. Unit-c also marks a sharp contact with underlying fine sand Unit-f. (d) Close-up view of geoslice GS3 collected from the base of T1-trench. The stratigraphy in the upper portion shows Unit-i with a gradual contact with overlying peat (Unit-h). Lower portion exhibits well-preserved paleo-tsunami deposit (Unit-l) with a sharp contact with Unit-k. Unit-l is ~30 cm thick medium sand-silt comprised of broken shells, coral fragments and rip-up plant material. It shows prominent inclined stratification. Unit-k comprised of silty-sand also shows sharp contact with overlying peat (Unit-j). Refer Fig. 2a,b for location.

Full size image
Figure 4
figure4
(a) The GS5 geoslice was collected from further deeper portion of the trench T1. About 40–45 cm thick paleo-tsunami deposit (Unit-l) comprises of alternate layers of medium to coarse sand with broken shell fragments, plant debris, rip-up clasts, and shows bi-directional structure. It shows sharp contacts with overlying Unit-k and underlying Unit-m. (b) GS8 displays a thin layer of 2004 tsunami (Unit-b), shows a sharp contact with overlying and underlying peaty units. This inland section also shows a very thin lens of Unit-d (fine sand) and Unit-g (medium-fine sand). Unit-l is greyish coarse sand with gravel (sandstone) clasts, shows sharp contact with Unit-m. Unit-P is thickest, comprised of gravel to coarse sand along with broken shells and coral fragments. (c) Geoslice GS9 exhibits Units-b, d, g, l, n and p – indicative of tsunami deposits. Unit-b shows sharp contacts with underlying and overlying units. Units d and g comprised of medium-fine sand are paleo-tsunami deposits, mark sharp contacts with underlying units. Units l, n and p represent paleo-tsunami deposits, separated by peaty units m and o. Unit p consist of coarse sand and gravel clasts, broken coral and shell fragments, and shows sharp contact with the overlying Unit-o. Unit-n made-up of coarse sand with inclined stratification shows sharp contact with the overlying and underlying units (Units m and o). (d) The GS10 geoslice collected from back-marsh shows thin medium sand layer of 2004 tsunami sandwiched between peaty soils pre- (Unit-a) and post- (Unit-c) 2004 event with sharp contacts. Unit-l comprised of sandstone clasts (gravel) and coarse sand shows a gradual contact with the overlying Unit-j and a sharp contact with underlying Unit-m. Units n and p are paleo-tsunamis sharing the same contact. Unit-o is missing in this section. Unit-n is a medium sand unit showing inclined laminations, rip-up clasts and broken shell and coral fragments. Unit-p is medium-coarse sand with coarser fragments of coral clasts and broken shells with bi-directional structures. Unit-p shows sharp contacts with underlying Unit-q (peaty soil) and overlying paleo-tsunami (Unit-n). Unit-r comprise coarse sand with fine gravel clasts, occurs at a depth of ~270 cm. Refer Fig. 2a,b for location.

Full size image
Unit-i is structureless grayish fine silty-sand, with sharp to gradual contact with Unit-j. Considering the thickness of 55–110 cm and finer nature of the unit, we infer that deposition took place during basin-filling, and the area remained submerged for a longer span during inter-seismic period (Figs. 2b and 4c; Supplementary Figs. S2.3–S2.4). Unit-j is peaty soil with fine sand, shows gradual contact with the overlying unit and a sharp contact with the Unit-k. We infer that the area was at or above mean sea-level before subsidence. (Figs. 2b, 3d and 4c,d; Supplementary Figs. S2.3–S2.4). Unit-k is yellowish medium-fine sand with scattered fine gravels, deposited in intertidal to subtidal condition (Fig. 2b; Supplementary Figs. S2.2–S2.4). Unit-l is greyish brown medium-coarse sand with coral clast and broken shells, show sharp contacts with Units m and k (Figs. 2b, 3d and 4a–d; Supplementary Figs. S2.3–S2.4). The unit is thicker and coarser towards the ocean, and finer and thinner towards inland. It shows prominent inclined stratification with bi-directional structure, alternative layers of greyish medium-coarse sand with silt and fine gravel clasts containing broken shell and coral fragments, plant debris, and rip-up clasts of bedrock (Fig. 2b, 3d and 4a–d). We suggests that this unit was deposited by a tsunami triggered by an earthquake that caused coseismic subsidence as indicated by overlying finer Unit-k (Fig. 2b). Unit-m is peaty soil with silty-sand, which separates Unit-l from Unit-n with sharp contacts (Figs. 2b and 4a–d; Supplementary Figs. S2.2–S2.4). Considering the study area in proximity to the ocean, we infer that this peaty unit was formed due to land-level change (Fig. 2b). Unit-n is greyish medium-coarse sand, marked by inclined laminations, with thin layers of coarser fragments comprised of broken shells, and rip-up clasts in the upper portion. It shows sharp contact with underlying peat Unit-o, which formed at or above mean sea-level (Figs. 2b and 4b–d; Supplementary Figs. S2.3). We infer that this unit (Unit-n) was deposited by tsunami generated by local event along the Andaman segment (Figs. 2b and 4b–d; Supplementary Figs. S2.3). Unit-p, a thick grayish coarse sand, with corals clasts, broken shells and rock fragments, is exposed at a depth of ~2 m, and shows sharp contacts with Unit-o and Unit-q (Figs. 2b and 4c,d). This unit in some sections shows poor lamination, with scattered gravels observed in the upper, and the middle portions as well as inverse grading (Fig. 4b–d). The unit was deposited by a tsunami event (Fig. 2b). Unit-q is a peaty unit composed of greyish fine sand with scattered gravel fragments (Figs. 2b and 4b). It shows sharp contacts with the underlying and overlying units (Fig. 2b), and possibly formed at or above mean sea level. Unit-r is coarse sand with broken shell fragments, deposited by a tsunami event (Figs. 2b and 4d).

Synthesis of sedimentological (structures, grain size, lithology), geochemical (major and trace element abundances) and biological (foraminifera) data suggest that Units b, d, g, l, n, p and r were deposited by sudden high-energy wave events – tsunamis3,18,19 (Figs. 2–6; Supplementary Data S2–S5). Clear discrimination between tsunami and storm deposits is difficult. However, most of the cyclones around Anadman start to develop at their initial stage and are not strong enough to affect the sedimentation pattern3. This rules-out the possibility of the identified deposits to be non-tsunami origin. Also, the lithounits identified in the exposed geoslicers and trenches show distinct sedimentological signatures like alternate layers of medium sand and silt or coarse sand, broken shell and coral fragments, poorly sorted sediments, normal to inverse grading, rip-up clasts, plant material, inclined stratification, bi-directional structures etc. Further, it is also argued that usually tsunami deposits show layers with bi-directional flow, i.e., towards landward and seaward directions, whereas, storm or cyclone deposits do not show such bi-directional flow20,21. Tsunami deposits usually show bi-modal distribution of grain size, whereas, storm deposits are well sorted21. In our study we found layers with bi-directional flow as well as bi-modal distribution of grain size. Hence, we conclude that the deposits from Badabalu are deposited by tsunami events.

Figure 5
figure5
Variabilities in major oxides abundances (wt. %) in the complete litho-stratigraphic section (from Unit-a to Unit-q). The tsunami Units (marked by yellow color, Units b, d, g, l, n, p) show distinct enrichment in CaO, MnO, and P2O5, and depletion in K2O, and Na2O compared to those in the adjacent non-tsunami (terrigenous) Units. Other oxides like SiO2, Al2O3, Fe2O3, TiO2, and MgO show a clear depletion in the younger tsunami deposits, i.e., Units b, d, and g (in yellow), except in Unit-b with higher SiO2. All elements show a comparatively higher concentration in the older tsunami deposits (Units l, n, and p). Whereas, all the adjacent non-tsunami deposits, i.e. Units a, c, e, f, h, i, j, k, m, and q show medium to high concentration of the elements like Si, Al, Fe, Ti, and Mg, and thus, are indicative of terrigenous deposits. Also, the overall depletion of these elements within Units b, d, g, l, n, and p characterize tsunamigenic origin of these deposits. The Ca and Mn enrichment is a characteristic signature indicating marine origin of these sediments. Though Na and K ions constitute a significant part of the seawater, their depletion in the tsunami deposits is suggestive of chemical alteration through ion-exchange due to leaching and prolonged burial.

Full size image
Figure 6
figure6
Modelled calendar ages and probability distributions of stratigraphy exposed in geoslices and trenches excavated along WNW-ESE transect at Badabalu. The ages are calculated and modeled using OxCal version 4.2.4 (Reimer et al.22) and IntCal13 atmospheric curves (Reimer et al.23). We infer at least eight events (earthquakes/tsunamis) those occurred in last 8000 yrs. Event I represents 2004 tsunami; Event II was around AD 1777–1883, could be correlated with AD 1881 earthquake and tsunami from Car Nicobar. Event III occurred during AD 1674–1821, could be correlated with AD 1762 earthquake/tsunami reported from Arakan Suduction Zone. Event IV was around AD 1485–1610, correlated with AD 1672 reported from Andaman Island. Event V was around AD 1325–1434, correlated with AD 1300–1400 earthquake and tsunami from Andaman, Thailand and Indonesia. Event VI was around BC 2480–2060, could be correlated with a tsunami reported from southeast Sri Lanka that occurred during BC 2000–3000. Event VII occurred during BC 2966–2286, correlated with tsunami event that occurred during BCE 2810-3200 reported from southeast Sri Lanka, and also with the event of BCE 2892-1895 reported from Indonesia. Event VIII occurred before BC 5600, correlated with event that occurred during BCE 5786-5301 and tsunami during BCE 5374-5579 reported from Indonesia. Conventional radiocarbon ages, OSL ages and other relevant details are summarized in Tables S4.1 and S4.2. Areas with white outlines indicate the probability distributions functions (PDFs) of calibrated radiocarbon ages. Gray areas represent posterior PDFs. Brackets below each PDF are 2σ uncertainties.

Full size image
Micro-fossil analysis
Quantitative analysis of foraminifera obtained from Units b, d, e, g, n and p indicated two distinct biofacies suggestive of marginal marine environments and sediment provenance: Biofacies-I: subtidal, and Biofacies-II: intertidal (Supplementary Data S3; Figs. S3.1–S3.3; Tables S3.1–S3.2). Units p and n exposed from the 350 m inland section show two sediment sources derived from marginal marine environment. Unit-n corresponds to the Biofacies-I, comprises majority of subtidal species like Rotalia sp., and Eiphidium crispum with minor amount of Quinqueloculina seminulam, and Amphistegina Amphistegina lobifera. Whereas, Unit-p shows dominance of Ammonia beccarii - an intertidal species (Supplementary Fig. S3.3). Foraminifera assemblages from Units b, d, and g also show same kind of species and taphonomy. These units also show high percentage of abraded and fragmented foraminifera test (Supplementary Fig. S3.1). The peaty soil Unit-e with Elphidium discoidale suggests shallow intertidal-beach environment. The change in the environment from intertidal-beach to wetland is attributed to interseismic uplift. This further strengthen our interpretation that Units b, d, g, n and p were deposited by tsunami events, which transported and deposited forams from different depths (Supplementary Data S3).

Dating (OSL and AMS)
From the exposed succession (geoslices + trenches) at Badabalu, we obtained 22 ages (Figs. 2b, 6 and 7; Tables 1 and 2; Supplementary Data S4; Tables S4.1 and S4.2; Fig. S4.1). Eighteen radiocarbon (Accelerator Mass Spectrometer, AMS) ages were obtained by dating charcoal, buried wood, and plant material, along with four Optically Stimulated Luminescence (OSL) ages of the sediment samples. The ages range from cal BCE 5600 to cal CE 2000. All ages were calibrated and modelled with OxCal v.4.2.4 to obtain the calendar ages and events (Fig. 6)22,23. A distinct depositional gap of 2000 years was observed between 3590 and 1530 cal BCE (Fig. 6).

Figure 7
figure7
Composite stratigraphic-section constructed using the litho-sections obtained from geoslices and trenches at Badabalu, south coast of Andaman Island.

Full size image
Table 1 14C Accelerator Mass Spectrometry (AMS) ages from Badabalu (for more details refer Supplementary Table S5.1).
Full size table
Table 2 Optical Stimulation Luminescence (OSL) ages from Badabalu (for more details refer Supplementary Table S5.2).
Full size table
The OSL ages gave some offset due to over-dispersion of De (Equivalent Dose), hence the Minimum Age Model (MAM) was used (Fig. S4.1). Although, the age obtained from 2004 tsunami sand was the most reliable, the estimated age gave an offset of 20-40 years. Similar results of residual charge equivalent to <50 year have been observed in the 2004 tsunami deposits from India24; 60–120 years from Lisbon 1755 tsunami25; and 20–40 years from Thailand tsunami26.

Geochemical analysis
The major oxides and trace elemental abundances in sediments from Badabalu revealed characteristic signatures similar to that observed in other global tsunami deposits (Fig. 5; Supplementary Data S5; Fig. S5.1; Table S5.1). Tsunami and non-tsunami deposits (i.e., terrigenous) identified on the basis of sedimentological and microfossil proxies showed differences in geochemical signatures (Supplementary Data S3 and S5). In the upper section (<50 cm), the tsunami Units b, d, and g have distinctly lower abundances of Al2O3, Fe2O3, and K2O compared to those of the intermittent (non-tsunami) Units a, c, e, f, and h (Fig. 5). However, the tsunami layers (Units l, n, and p) in the bottom section (>150 cm) do not show lower abundances of Al2O3, Fe2O3, and K2O relative to the adjacent non-tsunami Units k, m, and q (Fig. 5). Interestingly, the tsunami deposits in the bottom section are thicker compared to those in the upper portion. It is possible that the some of the distinct geochemical signatures in these older tsunami deposits are disturbed due to prolonged burial and leaching27. On the other hand, all the tsunami Units b, d, g, l, n and p contain distinctly higher CaO and MnO than the other terrigenous Units a, c, e, f, h, i, j, k, m, o, and q. High abundance of CaO and MnO is a characteristic signature in tsunami deposits27. In general, the terrigenous units are also characterized by the higher contents of SiO2, TiO2, MgO and Na2O compared to the tsunami units (Fig. 5). The major oxides abundances further strengthen our interpretation that Units b, d, g, l, n and p are of marine origin, and deposited inland during tsunami events.

Compared to the terrigenous units, the tsunami Units b, d, g, l, n and p are generally enriched in alkali elements, in particular Ca, Na, K, Sr and have higher Ca/Sr, Na/K, and Sr/Ba ratios (Supplementary Fig. S5.1; Table S5.1). Higher Rare Earth Elements (REEs) and Large Ion Lithophile Elements (LILE: Rb, Ba), and Transition Trace Elements (TTE: Cu, V, Cr, Co, Ni) abundances in tsunami units indicate sediment input from submarine sources (Supplementary Figs. S5.1). The Ce anomaly (Ce/Ce* = CeCN/(LaCN × NdCN)0.5; CN is chondrite-normalized) has been considered as a paleo-oceanographic indicator of widespread marine anoxia28. The chondrite-normalized REE patterns of the majority of the tsunami samples exhibit a distinct positive Ce anomaly with the Ce/Ce* ratio varying from 1.0 to 2.55 (Supplementary Data Table S5.1). Cerium can exist in +3 or +4 oxidation states depending on the redox conditions. The insoluble Ce4+ is prone to be adsorbed and sequestered by Mn-oxides and hydroxides under oxidizing environment and thus marine sediments rich in Fe–Mn exhibit positive Ce anomalies29. The range of Ce/Ce* values (1.0 to 2.55) in the sediments from tsunami layers confirm an origin in anoxic to suboxic environment. Thus, characteristic geochemical signatures in Units b, d, g, l, n and p further affirms their tsunamigenic origin.

Discussion and Conclusions
The signatures of 2004 Sumatra-Andaman earthquake and tsunami were considered as a modern analogue to distinguish the role of local and distant source earthquakes towards the deposition of tsunami deposits. At Badabalu, we found relatively thicker and coarser deposits (Units l, n and p) as compared to Unit-b deposited by 2004 tsunami. The presences of thicker deposits could be attributed to the paleo-shoreline morphology. Possibly at the time of deposition the beach-ridge and associated back-marsh were located farther inland relative to the present coastline configuration, with deposition taking place in a swale or back-marsh area. Further, the coarser and thicker deposits could be related to tsunami events with much higher energy conditions, which was possible by a major earthquake triggered along the Andaman-Arakan Segment, suggesting a local earthquake. This is well justified comparing the 2004 tsunami deposit at the same location. Therefore, we infer that the thicker and coarser units (viz. Units l, n and p) were deposited by the local-source earthquakes those occurred along the Andaman-Arakan Segment. Paleo-tsunami and paleoseismic events identified in the present study were correlated with the reported events from the areas adjoining Indian Ocean (Supplementary Table S1).

The present study from Badabalu revealed evidence of at least seven tsunami events in the last 8000 years (Figs. 2b, 6 and 7; Supplementary Data S4a-b; Tables S4.1 and 4.2). These events were bracketed based on their modelled calendar ages22,23 (Tables 1 and 2; Supplementary Tables S4.1 and S4.2). The Event-I (Unit-b), having an OSL age of CE 1999–2007, represents the 2004 Sumatra-Andaman tsunami (Table 2; Supplementary Tables S1 and S4.2). Event II (Unit-d) occurred around CE 1838–1883, after CE 1747–1850 and before CE 1999–2007 (Figs. 2b, 6 and 7; Tables 1 and 2; Supplementary Table S1). We correlate this event with the 1881 (Mw 7.9) Car Nicobar earthquake, which was felt over much of India and parts of Burma as well as in the Bay of Bengal30. This was a local event that occurred along the Andaman segment, generated 0.8 m high tsunami, resulted in an uplift of 10–60 cm at Car Nicobar30, but did not have a widespread effect. Event-III (Unit-g) took place around CE 1747–1850, after CE 1649–1787 and before CE 1838–1833, and correlates with an earthquake of CE 1762 (Mw7.5) (Figs. 2b, 6 and 7; Tables 1 and 2; Supplementary Table S1). This event occurred along the Arakan Subduction Zone that caused uplift of ~3–7 m along the coasts of Ramree, Cheduba, and Foul Islands, located offshore of the Arakan coast of Myanmar10, and also generated a tsunami31. Signatures of liquefaction and tsunami deposit were also reported from Mitha-Khadi around Port Blair in Andaman Island6. However, no clear evidence of land-level change was found at the present study site. This suggest that Andaman was at the southern tip of this rupture. Event-IV (Unit-j) occurred after CE 1463–1581 and before CE 1747–1850. The event correlates with the historic earthquake of CE 1679 (Figs. 2b, 6 and 7), which was felt around Arakan (Burma), Bangladesh, Chennai, and areas adjoining Indian Ocean32. This event may also be correlated with: (i) the event occurred along the Andaman Segment, that accompanied land-subsidence during CE 1600 from Mitha-Khadi near Port Blair6, (ii) a tsunami event of CE 1640–1950 reported from Sumatra8, and/or (iii) with a tsunami event of CE 1530–1730 (380 ± 50 cal. BP) from Thailand31. Considering its wide-spread effect we suggest that this event was triggered along the Andaman Segment and was comparatively larger than CE 1881 (Event II), inflicting wider effect in the Indian Ocean. Event V (Unit-l) occurred after CE 1305–1420 and before CE 1510–1632 (Figs. 2b, 6 and 7), which correlates with the CE 1300–1400 tsunami reported from Phra Thong, Thailand12,13,33 and CE 1290–1400 tsunami from Aceh, Indonesia8. This event may also be correlated with the CE 1120–1300 tsunami event reported from the west coast of Andaman3, and with turbidites found from Sumatra (T3: 630 ± 110 cal. BP; CE 1159–1480)14. Also, signatures of subsidence and tsunami deposit during CE 1040–1495 have been reported from the south Andaman, as well as an uplift from Hut Bay and north Andaman11,12. This was a mega earthquake sourced locally along the Andaman segment and resulted in a transoceanic tsunami3. Event VI (Unit-n) occurred after BCE 2660–2100 and before CE 428–600 (Figs. 2b, 6 and 7, Tables 1 and 2; Supplementary Table S1). Further considering the youngest age of detrital charcoal from Unit-n (BCE 2024–1885), we suggest that Event VI occurred after BCE 2024–1885. This event may be correlated with turbidites observed in a core (T26: 3720 ± 340; BCE 3095–1290) from Sumatra14, and also with the tsunami of BCE 2000–3000 reported from Peraliya, Sir Lanka34,35. We infer that Event VI was a local event produced by Andaman Segment, generated a tsunami that reached the eastern coast of India and Sri Lanka. Event VII (Unit-p) was after BCE 3086–2758 and before BCE 2661–2100, during BCE 2966–2286 (Figs. 2b, 6 and 7, Tables 1 and 2). Due to a wider age bracket it is difficult to correlate this event with a particular event reported from other adjoining areas in the Indian Ocean. Nevertheless, it may be correlated with the BCE 2810–3200 (4760–5150 cal. BP) tsunami reported from Karagan Lagoon, southeast Sri Lanka34,35, and also with turbidites reported from Sumatra (T27: 3900 ± 190 cal. BP; BCE 2892–1895)14. Since we do not have any lower limit bracketing Event VIII, we suggest that Event VIII (Unit-r) occurred before BCE 5612–5323 (Figs. 2b, 6 and 7, Tables 1 and 2; Supplementary Table S1). This event can be correlated with turbidite identified from Sumatra during (T43: 6600 ± 140 cal. BP; BCE 5786–5301)14, and with the BCE 5374–5579 (7324–7529 cal. BP) tsunami event reported from Indonesia36. Because we found this tsunami deposit in only one geoslice (Fig. 2b), it is difficult to ascertain if this was a local (Andaman segment) or a distant sourced event.

Based on the stratigraphic record, OSL and 14C AMS ages, and modelled ages in OxCal, we observed a considerable depositional gap for almost 2000 year between 3700 and 1500 years BP (Figs. 2b, 6 and 7, Supplementary Data S4, Table S4.1–S4.2). This discontinuous stratigraphic record could be attributed to erosion due to one of the possibilities: (a) coseismic uplift or gradual uplift during inter-seismic period along the up-dip portion of the subducting plate or upper plate fault. But no upper plate fault from this region has been reported; (b) Relative Sea Level (RSL) fall which accelerated erosion of the stratigraphic sequence. The chronology of the beach ridges and reconstruction of complex pattern of shoreline progradation and erosion from Phra Thong, Thailand suggest a short episode of local erosion between 4000 and 3800 yr BP, could be attributed to climate change, impact of a tsunami or tropical cyclone37. Further, Brill et al.37 also reported a signature of sea-level fall and shoreline progradation from Phra Thong with decreased rate of <1 m/year during 3300–3500 yr BP. Dura et al.38 reported an incomplete record of subduction zone earthquakes in coastal stratigraphy from the coast of Sumatra, because the late Holocene (last 4 ka) RSL or sea-level fall facilitated erosion and restricting preservation of lithounits. Following these arguments, we suggest that erosion was accelerated due to RSL fall at ~3500 BP in Andaman and Nicobar Islands. The continuous stratigraphic sequence from 1500 years BP till present is attributed to a gradual RSL rise, which remained within the tidal frame of 1–2 m in the Andaman region.

The lower portion of the stratigraphic section comprising Units l to r reveals stacked sequence of peaty units (wetland soils; Units m, o and q) and tsunami deposits (Figs. 6 and 7). The Unit-k comprising fine-medium silty-sand suggests basin-fill under sub-tidal condition followed by a gradual uplift during inter-seismic period. The peaty soil (Unit-j) indicates the formation of wetland soil at or above mean sea-level. This was followed by a coseismic subsidence, and a long-term post-seismic subsidence is well justified by the presence of a 75 cm thick very fine sand (Unit-i). The presence of Unit-h (peaty soil) suggests that the area was at or above mean sea-level. We infer that the area emerged from deeper environment (sub-tidal) around this time.

The upper portion of the stratigraphic section, Unit-b marks the 2004 tsunami, Units d and g represents tsunamis during the recent historic time (Figs. 5–7). Unit-f with fine sand suggests that the area was under the influence of sub-tidal environment, whereas Units e and c (peaty soils) indicate that the area was at or above mean sea-level. Possibly the area experienced subsidence during these earthquakes and recovered during post-seismic period, which eventually facilitated the formation of wetland soils and vegetation growth. The area remained submerged for substantially longer span during inter-seismic period as indicated by a thick fine silty-sand (Unit-i) (Figs. 6 and 7). A long-term inter-seismic subsidence implies a huge strain accumulation. However, couple of large magnitude earthquakes viz. CE 1881, with a rupture near Car Nicobar in the mid-segment of Andaman, and CE 1762, ruptured along the Arakan Subduction Zone, partially released the long-term accumulated strain after CE 1679 event. The CE 1679 event was a local event having its rupture along the Andaman Island. Hence, we conclude that the Andaman Segment has enough accumulated strain to trigger a mega- tsunamigenic subduction zone earthquake in near future. A 2000 years stratigraphic gap add to the uncertainty associated with the estimation of the recurrence of tsunamigenic earthquakes. However, 1500 years of continuous sequence suggests a recurrence of 420–750 years for a mega-earthquakes along subduction zone like the 660–880 CE3, 1300–1400 CE and the 2004 Sumatra Andaman earthquake having different source. A shorter interval of 80–120 years is inferred for the large earthquakes like 1679, 1762 and 1881 CE.

Methods
Google Earth images (pre and post 2004 earthquake) were used to identify the location that experienced land-level change and having a shoreline configuration with beach-ridge-swale topography, which are ideal for the preservation of tsunami deposits (Supplementary Figs. S1.1a–h and S1.2a,b). A detailed topographic survey using Total Station was conducted transverse to the shoreline along the WNW-ESE transect (Figs. 1d and 2a).

We identified typical signatures of paleo-earthquakes and paleo-tsunamis from shallow stratigraphy at Badabalu (Figs. 1c,d and 2a,b; Supplementary Figs. S2.1–S2.4). The area is marked by typical beach ridge-swale-beach ridge topography, with a distinct back-marsh (Figs. 1d and 2a,b). Such geomorphic setting is considered to be an ideal sites for the preservation of tsunami deposits13. Three 1–1.5 m deep trenches (T1-T3; Fig. 2a) were excavated, and 10 geoslices (GS1-GS10) 1.5–3 m deep along a WNW-ESE transect normal to the coastline were obtained (Figs. 1d and 2a,b; Supplementary Data S2, Figs. S2.1–S2.4). All exposed stratigraphic sections studied are perpendicular to the shoreline. Lithounits in the exposed sections were classified based on their sedimentological characteristics in the field (e.g., color, grain size, contacts etc.) (Figs. 2b, 3a–d and 4a–d; Supplementary Figs. S2.1a–e and S2.2–S2.4). To further strengthen our interpretations towards differentiating tsunami and non-tsunami deposits, we preformed geochemical and micro-fossil analysis (Fig. 5; Supplementary Data S3 and S5; Figs. S3.1–3.3; S5.1). The foraminifera analysis was carried with a standard methodology (Supplementary Data S3; Fig. S3.1 and Table S3.1). To identify the environment foraminifera we carried out Q-mode cluster analysis using Constrained Incremental Sum of Squares (CONISS) method39, Fisher Alpha Diversity Index (FADI)40, Detrended Correspondence Analysis (DCA), and Hierarchical Dendrograms41 (Fig. S3.2).

Four sediment samples were dated by Optical Stimulated Luminescence (OSL) dating technique at IIT Kanpur, and 18 samples were dated for 14C (AMS) ages at Beta Analytic, USA, as well as at Inter University Accelerator Centre (IUAC), New Delhi (Supplementary Data S4; Figs. S4.1–S4.3). We collected sediment samples from the exposed trenches as well as geoslices obtained from Badabalu site (Figs. S2.1–S2.11; Table S4.2). For paleodose measurement, samples were treated with 1 N HCl for one hour followed by washing the sample at least three times with de-ionized water. It was followed by treatment with 30% H2O2 until all the effervescence disappeared, and washed again with de-ionized water. This is done to get rid of carbonates and organic matter from the sediments. Dried samples were then sieved to obtain 90–212 um grain fractions of which only 90–125 um fraction size was used for further analysis. The quartz and feldspar were isolated with the help of Frantz magnetic separator with constant current of 1.50A. Then the isolated quartz was etched with 40% Hydrofluoric acid (HF) solution for 60 minutes to remove outer alpha skin and dissolve any leftover feldspar. The isolated quartz was then rinsed with HCL to get rid of any fluorite precipitate from HF acid. After drying, the sample was re-sieved to remove <90 um to acquire fine pure quartz grains. These grains were then mounted on 9.8 mm diameter stainless steel aliquots with the help of silicon spray. All the processing was carried out in the laboratory controlled red light environment. For the paleodose determination, Riso TL/OSL reader with an EMI 9635Q photomultiplier and two 3 mm Hoya U-340 filters were used. Ages were calibrated and modelled with Bayesian analysis in the program OxCal v.4.2.4 to get calendar ages and events22,23 (Fig. S4.2; Supplementary Table S4.1 and Fig. S4.2).

To examine the geochemical signatures of the near-surface coastal stratigraphy from Badabalu site, we analysed 16 samples from 17 litho-units (Units a to q, except from Unit-o) for major oxides and selected trace element abundances (Fig. 5 and Supplementary Data S5; S5.1). Major oxides abundances were determined using a wavelength dispersive X-ray Fluorescence Spectrometry (WD-XRF, Rigaku ZSX Primus II) and trace element concentrations determined using an Inductively Coupled Plasma Mass Spectrometer (ICP-MS, Thermo Fisher Scientific iCAPQ) at IIT Kanpur. Detailed analytical procedure is given by Chandra et al.42. XRF analyses were carried out on fusion glass beads and ICP-MS analyses were done on samples digested using HF-HNO3 mixture. Based on three repetitive measurements of geo-standards (LKD-2, SBC-1, WGB-1, AGV-2) analysed with unknown samples, the uncertainty associated with the major elements is <5% and that for the trace elements is within the range of 3–10%.

Considering all above-mentioned data and ages (OSL and 14C AMS) a composite stratigraphy was generated for final interpretations towards identifying paleoseismic and associated tsunami events. Ages were used to bracket the events. An attempt was made to correlate the identified events with the events reported from adjoining areas along the Indian Ocean like Indonesia, Thailand, and Sri Lanka.

Abstract
The largest tsunamis are generated by seafloor uplift resulting from rupture of offshore subduction-zone megathrusts. The rupture of the shallowest part of a megathrust often produces unexpected outsize tsunami relative to their seismic magnitude. These are so called ‘tsunami earthquakes’, which are difficult to identify rapidly using the current tsunami warning systems, even though, they produce some of the deadliest tsunami. We here introduce a new method to evaluate the tsunami risk by measuring ionospheric total electron content (TEC). We examine two Mw 7.8 earthquakes (one is a tsunami earthquake and the other is not) generated in 2010 by the Sunda megathrust, offshore Sumatra, to demonstrate for the first time that observations of ionospheric sounding from Global Navigation Satellite System (GNSS) can be used to evaluate the tsunamigenic potential of earthquakes as early as 8 min after the mainshock.

Introduction
‘Tsunami earthquakes’, as originally defined by Kanamori1, are events generating tsunami with larger amplitude than expected from their seismic magnitude. Most tsunami earthquakes are generated by high levels of slip on the shallow megathrust, which results in large seafloor uplifts and hence very dangerous tsunami. The shallow location of the slip—close to the subduction trench—means that the ruptures generating tsunami earthquakes are at significant distance from land-based monitoring networks, limiting our ability to quickly and accurately assess their magnitude and source parameters. Conventional approaches using various seismological methods2,3,4 or rapid inversion of GNSS (Global Navigation Satellite System) estimates of ground motion5 regularly encounter difficulties in accurately estimating the uplift of the seafloor and consequently fail in predicting the tsunamigenic nature of tsunami earthquakes. These events are generated in the relatively soft accretionary wedge and are characterized by slow rupture velocities, and therefore lower levels of seismic energy radiation6,7; they are thus only weakly felt by nearby populations, prohibiting natural warnings.

In addition to seismic waves propagating within the solid Earth, tsunamigenic earthquakes can induce waves in the atmosphere, including the ionosphere. Firstly, the uplift of the seafloor at the source generates an acoustic-gravity pulse (AGWepi) that propagates through the atmosphere above the epicentral area (Fig. 1). This perturbation travels at the speed of high-atmospheric acoustic waves (~ 1,000 m/s) and reaches the ionosphere approximately 8 min after the event (Fig. 1)8. Due to the short response time, this ionospheric perturbation can provide critical information for rapidly assessing the tsunami potential. Secondly, if an ocean tsunami is generated, another perturbation later reaches the ionosphere. A tsunami is essentially an oceanic gravity wave; consequently, by linear dynamic coupling, it produces an atmospheric internal gravity wave (IGWtsuna), which reaches the ionosphere approximately 40 min after the event (Fig. 1)9. During the upward propagation, the generated AGWepi and IGWtsuna are both strongly amplified by the double effects of the exponential decrease of the atmospheric density ρ with altitude and the conservation of the kinetic energy ρv2, where v is the local speed oscillation induced by wave crossing. At ~ 300 km altitude in the ionosphere, the AGWepi and IGWtsuna are amplified enough to induce strong perturbations in the plasma density. These perturbations can be observed by ionospheric monitoring techniques, such as measurements of Total Electron Content (TEC) by GNSS (see10 for a review) or airglow cameras11,12. The TEC represents the number of electrons integrated along the ray-path between the GPS satellite and the station (see “Material and methods" for more details about TEC calculation). The signature of tsunamigenic earthquakes in the GNSS-derived TEC is consequently detectable in both the near-field by observing the AGWepi directly related to the uplift of the seafloor13,14 and the far-field by observing the IGWtsuna related to tsunami waves9,11,15,16,17.

Figure 1
figure1
(a) Schematic of the two ionospheric signals associated with a tsunamigenic earthquake. At the time of the earthquake (t0), the sudden rupture of the fault causes an uplift of the sea floor and subsequently triggers a tsunami. Acoustic Gravity Waves (AGWepi) associated with the uplift propagate through the atmosphere and reach the ionosphere ~ 8 min after the rupture. The tsunami is an oceanic internal gravity wave; consequently, by a linear coupling, it produces an atmospheric Internal Gravity Wave (IGWtsuna). The IGWtsuna reaches the ionosphere at time t1, ~ 40 min after the tsunami is initiated. (b) Main geological features of the Sumatran subduction zone. The contoured areas represent estimated coseismic rupture patches for the 6 April 2010 Mw 7.8 Banyaks earthquake in the north19, and the 25 October 2010 Mw 7.8 Mentawai earthquake in the south20. The yellow dots represent the SuGAr stations existing and available at the time of the events, while the green dots represent the current total extension of the SuGAr network.

Full size image
Based on the relation between the AGWepi, which reaches the ionosphere approximately 8 min after an event, and the uplift of the seafloor, we investigate the potential of using GNSS observations of ionospheric TEC to discriminate tsunami earthquakes. We propose a technique to validate the risk estimated by conventional seismological methods, based on quantification of the intensity of the AGWepi, to discriminate the tsunamigenic nature of an earthquake. As a case study, we examine two Mw 7.8 megathrust earthquakes that occurred in 2010 along the Sumatran subduction zone, which were both recorded by the Sumatran GPS Array (SuGAr) (Fig. 2). Although both events had the same magnitude, and were issued similar tsunami early warnings (later canceled), the 6 April 2010 Banyaks earthquake18,19, did not generate a significant tsunami and caused only minor earthquake-related damage to local infrastructure. On the contrary, the 25 October 2010 Mentawai event produced a large tsunami—recorded within 10 min of the earthquake by the Mentawai GPS buoy—which claimed more than 400 lives from communities along the coastlines of the Pagai Islands7,20,21 (see “Material and methods" for a comprehensive description of the two events and the corresponding responses of tsunami warning systems).

Figure 2
figure2
(a) Map of the distribution of ionospheric piercing points (IPPs) for the pairs of 29 GNSS stations and the four closest satellites at the time of the Mentawai earthquake (local time: 21:42:23 UTC + 7) (b) Map of the distribution of ionospheric piercing points (IPPs) for the pairs of 29 GNSS stations and the four closest satellites at the time of the Banyaks earthquake (local time: 5:15:02 UTC + 7). The IPPs are represented by four different symbols corresponding to different satellites; the symbols are located at positions along the trace of the IPPs corresponding to the event time. Note the bold traces highlighting the trajectory of the satellite-receivers pairs discussed in Fig. 3. The red stars represent the epicenter of the earthquakes. The cartoon of “Good LOS” (green) and “Poor LOS” (red) configurations is shown between a and b. (c) Hodochrones of the TEC perturbation observed by GPS satellites PRN 21, 9, 14, and 29. (d) Inset with color-scale 5 times smaller to highlight the gravity waves related to the IGWtsuna recorded by PRN 21. (e) Hodochrones of the TEC perturbation observed by GPS satellites PRN 2, 28, 5, and 17. Color-scale in (e) is 5 time smaller than (c). Vertical dashed lines represent the time of the event. The gray dashed lines show the speed of the AGWepi (800 m/s) and IGWtsuna (250 m/s).

Full size image
Our analysis of the ionospheric response to these two events provides a unique natural experiment to test if the ionosphere is sensitive to the rupture properties of earthquakes and tsunami genesis, and whether GNSS-TEC observations are capable of identifying the events that have a high level of tsunami potential.

At the time of the Mentawai earthquake, 29 stations of the SuGAr network were in operation (Figs. 1b and 2a), while 25 stations were operating at the time of the Banyaks earthquake (Figs. 1b and 2b). In both cases, more than eight GPS satellites were visible in the sky, and we selected the four that better detected the events with comparable observation geometries. Cahyadi and Heki22 observed that changes of the penetration angles of the line-of-sight (LOS) with respect to the AGWepi wave front propagating in the ionosphere can influence the amplitude of the detected signals. The authors referred to “good LOS” as the most favorable scenario for which the ionospheric piercing point (IPP) is located between the epicenter and the GNSS station (Fig. 2), in this configuration the LOS crosses mainly the positive part of the wave front returning a strong TEC signal. On the contrary they referred to “poor LOS” as the scenario for which the GNSS station is located between the epicenter and the IPP. With this second geometric configuration the LOS simultaneously penetrates the positive and negative parts of the anomaly, partially cancelling each other and consequently returning a weak signature in the GNSS-derived TEC. Moreover, as a consequence of the integrated nature of TEC along the station-satellite LOS, satellites at low elevation angles have a better detection capability8 (see Supplemental Figs. 1 and 2).

Accordingly, to be able to compare the TEC signatures of the two events analyzed in this work, we selected (from Fig. 2) four satellite-station pairs (Fig. 3) with similar angles and distances from the epicenter area that better represent the different LOS scenarios: Good LOS, with receiver-satellite pairs BTHL-PRN29 and UMLH-PRN17 for the Mentawai and Banyak Islands respectively; and Poor LOS, with BSAT-PRN14 and BSIM-PRN2 for the Mentawai and Banyak Islands respectively. During the Mentawai event the TEC shows a perturbation related to the AGWepi (Fig. 2) with a frequency signature between 1 and 7 mHz (Fig. 3a,b) appearing 8 min after the main shock (21:42:23 local time, UTC + 7) and propagating away from the epicenter at a horizontal speed of 600–800 m/s (Fig. 2c). Later, a second weaker TEC perturbation at a lower frequency (~ 1.5 mHz), related to the IGWtsuna appears to travel at a horizontal speed of ~ 250 m/s (Fig. 2d), consistent with the tsunami speed of ~ 220 m/s observed by DART buoy 56,001, located ~ 1,600 km from the epicenter6. The arrival time of IGWtsuna observed at the distance of 480 km from the epicenter (Fig. 3a) is coherent with the tsunami propagation. A much smaller TEC perturbation followed the Banyaks earthquake (Figs. 2e, 3c,d), which generated a much weaker tsunami that did not cause any damage (see “Material and methods" section).

Figure 3
figure3
Filtered ionospheric TEC time series and related spectrograms extracted by (a) observations of satellite PRN29 with respect to station BTHL (b) observations of satellite PRN14 with respect to station BSAT at the time of the 2010 Mw 7.8 Mentawai earthquake (c) observations of satellite PRN17 with respect to station UMLH and (d) observation of satellite PRN2 with respect to station BSIM at the time of the 2010 Mw 7.8 Banyaks earthquake. Grey curves represent the elevation angle of the satellite-receiver ray path. Solid red and white vertical lines indicate the time of the events. Dashed vertical lines indicate the time of the first potential arrival of the AGWepi (8 min) and the minimum time of IGWtsuna observation (40 min) in the ionosphere. Horizontal dashed lines are the Brünt-Vaïsalla frequency that represents the limit between gravity and acoustic domains.

Full size image
Figure 3 shows that regardless the LOS scenario, the Mentawai earthquake induces a greater signature in the GNSS-TEC highlighting the important amount of energy transferred in the ionosphere by this event. On the contrary for the Banyaks earthquake the TEC signature remains very weak also with a Good LOS geometry. Indeed, the GNSS-TEC traces in the hodochrones in Fig. 2c,f show that the satellite coverage is dense enough to assure the favorable observation of the AGWepi and avoid attenuation effects related to the GNSS LOS geometry22.

Spectral analysis (Fig. 4) of observed TEC during the days before and after the Mentawai event reveals the unique characteristics of the AGWepi compared to the mean background level (MBL). The Ionospheric Tsunami Power Index (ITPI) is here introduced to define the ratio between TEC perturbation and MBL in order to remove the ionospheric dynamics, and consequently be able to compare the ITPI computed in different ionospheric conditions (see “Material and methods" section). We highlight that the ITPI is related to the entire spectrum of energy of the AGWepi and consequently provides an estimate of the strength of a perturbation detected in the ionosphere. Compared to the dTEC amplitude estimation used by previous authors, our approach is not affected by frequency pass-band filtering or polynomial fit to obtain the perturbation of TEC. The ITPI for the Mentawai event was 14, as TEC observations revealed a perturbation 14% larger than the MBL (Fig. 4). A comparable energetic signature related to external localized phenomena (e.g., plasma bubbles, traveling ionospheric disturbances) appeared on 22 October 2010 but this was not related to a seismic event and consequent tsunami early warning, showing the importance to couple ionospheric observations with conventional techniques. Weaker TEC perturbations followed the Banyaks earthquake, at approximately 5% of the MBL (Supplemental Fig. 3), confirming the presence of a weaker tsunami (ITPI = 5). The ITPI measured for the two events shows a correlation with the values of seafloor uplift reported by Cahyadi and Heki22, by the United States Geological Survey (USGS, https://earthquake.usgs.gov/earthquakes/), and by Hill et al.20. We complete our observations for the Mentawai and Banyak Islands with TEC observations for additional 17 tsunamigenic events extracted by Cahyadi and Heki22 and listed in Table 1. We correlated the TEC amplitude (blue symbols in Fig. 5) with the seafloor uplift and, for comparison, with our new ITPI. To better quantify the contribution of the seafloor uplift, we introduce a weighting factor here referred as the seafloor maximum volume displaced (Vmax). This parameter is obtained from the product of the maximum seafloor uplift and the rupture area (A) (see “Material and methods" section). Seafloor uplift is in reality quite spatially variable, often poorly constrained by slip inversions, and likely to be supplemented by inelastic uplift that is not accounted for in most models. However, this parameter can provide a first-order proxy for comparison with the ITPI. To emphasize the originality of our work we highlight that Cahyadi and Heki22 correlate the TEC (%) perturbations with the moment magnitude of the events and not with the consequent seafloor maximum volume displaced (Vmax), which takes into account also the extent of the seafloor uplift directly related to the tsunami genesis. Our empirical model, showed in Fig. 5, supports the possibility of obtaining information about the tsunami genesis from ionospheric perturbations.

Figure 4
figure4
Spectrograms of the filtered TEC signal recorded by the pair of station PTLO and satellite PRN29 at the epicenter of the 2010 Mw 7.8 Mentawai earthquake over seven consecutive days. Horizontal dashed lines are the Brünt-Vaïsalla frequency that represents the limit between the gravity and the acoustic domain. Vertical lines in the central panel (d) indicate, respectively from left to right: the time of the event (solid line); the first potential arrival of the AGWepi (8 min, dashed line); the minimum time of IGWtsuna observation (40 min, dashed line) in the ionosphere. Green contour lines mark where the intensity of the signal is above a threshold value that represents the mean background level (MBL) calculated on quiet days.

Full size image
Table 1 List of the events discussed in Fig. 5.
Full size table
Figure 5
figure5
Relation between seafloor maximum volume displaced (Vmax), coseismic TEC amplitude and ITPI for 17 events. Blue symbols represent earthquakes from the literature22,24,25. Red symbols represent the Mentawai and Banyak earthquakes discussed in this paper for which both the coseismic TEC amplitude and the ITPI have been computed. The left axis represents the TEC coseismic amplitudes normalized by background vertical TEC estimated from Global Ionospheric Maps (GIM) as defined by Cahyadi and Heki22. The right axis represents the ITPI for the Mentawai and Banyak events scaled proportionally to the computed coseismic TEC amplitude. X symbols represent events that generated a very small tsunami that did not cause damage. O symbols represent events that did generate a tsunami and damage.

Full size image
Coupled with early seismic observations of an earthquake (estimating magnitude and area of slip), the detection of the AGWepi by GNSS-TEC could provide valuable additional information—at the optimistic scenario of 8 min following the initiation of earthquake rupture—on the level of seafloor uplift and thus the potential of a significant tsunami. We highlight that the amplitude of the ionospheric TEC perturbation induced by the AGWepi is directly related to the seafloor maximum volume displaced (Vmax) (Fig. 5) and we do not need to intermediately evaluate the magnitude of the event or the source parameters to estimate the tsunami risk. Additionally, estimation of GNSS high-rate position has been demonstrated as a valid technique for source estimation and tsunami risk evaluation to complement seismic networks (e.g.,5). Thus, we can use the same GNSS receivers for the source estimation and the consequent early tsunami potential evaluation using positioning techniques and validate it using the ITPI analysis. We can confirm the uplift and related tsunami risk by looking for the TEC perturbation induced by the AGWepi within 8 min after the mainshock. After 40 min the TEC perturbation induced by the IGWtsuna gives a direct estimate of the oceanic displacement induced by the tsunami17 propagating in the open ocean. The IGWtsuna signature in the TEC has been already observed in real-time23, proving the potential role of ionospheric monitoring in real-time early warning.

With this work, we prove the maturity of ionospheric observations for evaluating tsunami potential, further showing the capability to discriminate the tsunamigenic nature of slow rupture events characterized by a low level of seismic energy radiation. In particular, estimations of ITPI could be fed into existing tsunami warning systems as an additional piece of information to alert for the presence of anomalous tsunami earthquakes and/or guard against false warnings. We hope to open a new paradigm in tsunami warning systems, based on the redundancy of information from the synergy of classic and new techniques to reduce damages and loss of life.

Material and methods
To investigate the TEC variations caused by the 2010 Mw 7.8 Mentawai and Banyaks earthquakes, we analyzed 15-s data from 29 and 25, respectively, continuous GNSS stations of the SuGAr network that were in operation on the day of each earthquake (Fig. 2). We analyzed the GNSS data for the week centered on the day of each earthquake to obtain the ionospheric perturbations before, during, and after the events.

We calculated the TEC by applying a method similar to the one described by Calais and Minster26. To obtain a more accurate measure of the apparent distance between a satellite and receiver, we used the carrier phase (L1 & L2), neglecting the less precise pseudo-range measurements (P1 & P2):

TEC=(L1−L2)40.3f21f22f21−f22
(1)
where, f1 and f2 are, respectively, the corresponding high and low GPS frequency and TEC is the total electron content measured in TEC units (1 TECU = 1016 el/m2). We detected and corrected the cycle slips using the program Ninja within the GPS-Inferred Positioning System and Orbit Analysis Simulation Software (GIPSY-OASIS) version 6.227.

As a consequence of the integrated nature of TEC, the observed ionospheric perturbations result from a large range of altitudes from the satellite to the receiver. However, the main contribution to the observed TEC variations is located around the height of the maximum of ionosphere ionization (the F2 layer). For this study, we fixed the altitude of the F2 layer at 300 km, which can be considered as the average altitude for day and night for the Equator. The intersection of the line of sight between each GNSS satellite-receiver pair at this altitude is termed the ionospheric pierce point (IPP), which we use to spatially visualize the observed TEC perturbations. In order to identify perturbations caused by the earthquake and the subsequent tsunami, we filtered all the initial TEC time series on a defined range of frequencies following the same methodology as Rolland et al.28. We applied a 1 to 10 mHz bandpass finite impulse response (FIR) Butterworth filter in order to remove the contributions from daily ionospheric variabilities, satellite motions, and instrumental biases.

We introduce for the first time the Ionospheric Tsunami Power Index (ITPI) to rapidly identify tsunamigenic earthquakes:

ITPI=(PSDMAXMBL−1)⋅100.
(2)
The ITPI corresponds to the ratio between the maximum level of power spectral density of the TEC (PSDMAX) recorded during the event, and the mean background level (MBL; defined as the maximum level of PSD recorded during the 6 days preceding the earthquake, averaged by the number of days). By averaging the background noise for several days prior to the event, we are able to remove outliers and smooth the noisy parts related to other perturbations traveling in the ionosphere. This new parameter could allow us to automatically identify the seafloor uplift and the consequent tsunamigenic potential of an event (Fig. 5). The relation for the Mentawai and Banyak events can be observed in Fig. 5, which shows, on the right side, the ITPI scale for the two events. The same relation with the seafloor maximum volume displaced Vmax can be observed for the Coseismic Ionospheric Disturbance (CID), which is shown on the left side for both the Mentawai and Banyak events and 17 earthquakes described in the literature22 and listed in Table 1. To calculate the seafloor maximum volume displaced (Vmax), we multiply the maximum uplift value for the rupture area (A). Values of uplift are provided by the US Geological Survey (USGS, https://earthquake.usgs.gov/earthquakes/) resulting from finite fault, calculated using Okada-style deformation codes29. We highlight that the ITPI is a more accurate way to estimate the ionospheric perturbation as it is calculated in the spectral domain and it is consequently free of eventual pass-band filter applied to CID.

Tsunami warning response to the two Mw 7.8 Mentawai and Banyaks earthquakes
We analyzed two Mw 7.8 earthquakes (Fig. 2) that occurred in 2010 along the Sunda megathrust (Indonesia): The 6 April Banyaks earthquake18,19 and the 25 October Mentawai earthquake7,20,21. Although they had the same magnitude, only the Mentawai earthquake produced an anomalously large tsunami.

The Banyaks earthquake ruptured a deeper portion (20–30 km) of the megathrust, producing relatively small uplift of the seafloor and thus only a small tsunami (max water height: 44 cm, max run up: 6 m, source NOAA database). On the other hand, the Mentawai earthquake was a shallow event with estimated slip concentrated at depths of < 6 km, no more than ~ 50 km away from the trench. Given the lower rigidity of the shallow sediments at this location, the Mentawai event generated considerably higher levels of slip20,30 than the Banyaks event18 while maintaining the same moment magnitude. The reported shake intensity at 150 km distance from the epicenter was MMI 5 and MMI 6 for the Mentawai, and for the Banyaks events, respectively. The high slip at shallow depths resulted in seafloor uplifts of up to several meters, producing the outsize tsunami with a reported maximum run up > 16 m20.

For the Mentawai event, the Badan Meteorologi Klimatologi Dan Geofisika (BMKG) of Indonesia initially estimated the magnitude as 7.2 and issued a tsunami warning within 5 min of the earthquake. The warning was afterward cleared without receiving information of tsunami damage21. The German Indonesian Tsunami Early Warning System (GITEWS) recorded the tsunami on a surface GPS buoy located in the Mentawai islands (GITEWS SUMATRA-03) within 10 min of the earthquake, with amplitudes of ~ 15 cm and a period of a few minutes21,30. Later the tsunami arrival was recorded by the Padang tide gauge about 1 h after the earthquake, and by the DART station 56,001 located around 1,600 km southeast of the epicenter about 2 h after the earthquake21,30. However, no tsunami warning was issued because some buoys had been vandalized31 and were not in operation. For the Banyaks event, BMKG also recognized a tsunami potential and immediately issued a tsunami warning that was canceled later, as only a minor tsunami was generated. For both events, the Pacific Tsunami Warning Center (PTWC) did not issue a warning, but a less severe tsunami watch, which was also canceled later (~ 2 h after). The GEOFON global seismological broadband network operated by the German GeoForschungsZentrum (GFZ) produced a real-time model for the two earthquakes, estimating a magnitude of Mw 7.6 for the Banyaks event and a magnitude of Mw 7.8 for the Mentawai event.

The Mentawai event did not provide a natural warning: witnesses reported feeling only weak, long-period shaking20. While many of the people on the islands knew to evacuate to higher ground on feeling strong earthquake shaking, they did not recognize this event was so dangerous. The characteristics of tsunami earthquakes make them particularly dangerous and exemplify the need for additional warning systems.

The current state of the art for tsunami early warning
Due to difficulties in accuractely estimating the source extent, conventional approaches – such as seismological methods—encounter difficulties in estimating the tsunamigenic potential of an earthquake. This problem has been addressed by various studies. Convers and Newman32 developed a new method to rapidly discriminate between normal and slow ruptures events, such as those of tsunami earthquakes3,7. Kanamori and Rivera2 developed a method based on W-phases to determine seismic source parameters for tsunami warning purposes. This method can be used to reliably determine magnitude within ~ 20 min of the event33. Recent studies have shown that real-time GPS and seismic data can also be used in a combined approach5. This technique allows for rapid determination of the size of the source within few minutes from the rupture34, resulting in a more effective analysis compared to the seismic analysis alone, which suffers from saturation at large magnitudes. Melgar et al.34 tested their algorithm for rapid magnitude estimation with high-rate GPS data for a large number of events, with the Mentawai event being the least successful one. The uncertainties in the magnitude estimation for this particular event highlight again that additional techniques for rapid identification of tsunami earthquakes could improve current warning systems.

Several techniques that imply direct approaches, such as the use of offshore instruments, have been extensively applied for tsunami detection. NOAA developed and deployed the Deep-ocean Assessment and Reporting of Tsunami (DART). DART consists of a sea floor bottom pressure recorder and a moored surface buoy (https://www.ndbc.noaa.gov/dart/dart.shtml). Nevertheless, a DART buoy is primarily suitable to detect a far-field tsunami, as they are deployed and anchored at least 250 miles away from the shore33 thus being less useful for near-field events. GPS buoys and tide gauges, such as these deployed by the Nationwide Ocean Wave information network for Ports and HArbourS (NOWPHAS) near the Japanese coastline, and by the GITEWS, which was operating along the Sumatran coast between 2005 and 201135, have the potential to provide short time tsunami warning within 10 min of the earthquake. However, in addition to damage caused by weather conditions, floating buoys may be also subject to vandalism, particularly in marine water that is favorable to fishing36. Servicing damaged buoys can be challenging and costly.

Other ocean-bottom seismographic and tsunami observation systems, based on fiber-optics submarine cables, have also been developed for tsunami detection37. These techniques are based on monitoring seafloor earthquakes to detect tsunami. However, these systems come with deployment costs that are usually prohibitively high. More recently, Xerandy et. al.38 proposed a new method based on an underwater communication system composed of fiber optic cables and an undersea network of sensors that could give a 20-min warning time.

It is clear that any additional information that gives rapid identification of the tsunami potential resulting from an earthquake would be useful for the success of tsunami early warning systems. In this study, therefore, we analyze the ionospheric response to two test events of the same seismic magnitude, which provide a unique natural experiment to test if the ionosphere is sensitive to the rupture properties and tsunami genesis, and whether GNSS-TEC observations are able to identify the events that have a high level of tsunami potential.

Data availability

Abstract
The devastating 2004 Indian Ocean tsunami caught millions of coastal residents and the scientific community off-guard. Subsequent research in the Indian Ocean basin has identified prehistoric tsunamis, but the timing and recurrence intervals of such events are uncertain. Here we present an extraordinary 7,400 year stratigraphic sequence of prehistoric tsunami deposits from a coastal cave in Aceh, Indonesia. This record demonstrates that at least 11 prehistoric tsunamis struck the Aceh coast between 7,400 and 2,900 years ago. The average time period between tsunamis is about 450 years with intervals ranging from a long, dormant period of over 2,000 years, to multiple tsunamis within the span of a century. Although there is evidence that the likelihood of another tsunamigenic earthquake in Aceh province is high, these variable recurrence intervals suggest that long dormant periods may follow Sunda megathrust ruptures as large as that of the 2004 Indian Ocean tsunami.

Introduction
Projections of fatalities due to catastrophic earthquakes and tsunamis will likely exceed 2 million lives in the twenty-first century1. Advances in geodesy and seismology have contributed to our understanding of rupture patterns of large earthquakes, but the devastation caused by the 2011 Tohoku-oki and the 2004 Indian Ocean tsunamis make it clear that estimates of earthquake size and tsunami potential are woefully inadequate. The repeat times of such giant tsunamis can occur centuries to millennia apart2,3,4,5 and are not fully captured in historical and instrumental records2,3. A more refined understanding of the long-term variations in timing and recurrence of giant tsunamis is essential for producing realistic vulnerability assessments for coastal communities.

The great Sumatra–Andaman earthquake triggered a tsunami that devastated south and southeast Asia5,6. At the time, there was no known historic precedent for the 1,500 km rupture of the Sunda megathrust5, with slip exceeding over 20 m (refs 6, 7). In the decade since the Indian Ocean tsunami, the search for prehistoric estimates of earthquake recurrence and tsunami potential remains elusive. Most reconstructions of past tsunami inundation are based on identifying anomalous beds of sand in low-energy environments, such as salt and freshwater marshes, coastal lakes or swales8,9. Prehistoric tsunamis have been identified using such geological records from northern Sumatra10,11,12, Thailand13,14,15,16,17, Andaman Islands18, Sri Lanka19, Eastern India20 and the Maldives21, but the timeline of their reconstructions is limited or fragmentary, hindered by preservation problems, reworking and a lack of accommodation space22.

We identify coastal caves as a new depositional environment for reconstructing tsunami records and present a 5,000 year record of continuous tsunami deposits from a coastal cave in Sumatra, Indonesia (Fig. 1), which shows the irregular recurrence of 11 tsunamis between 7,400 and 2,900 years BP. The sedimentary record in the cave shows that ruptures of the Sunda megathrust vary between large (which generated the 2004 Indian Ocean tsunami) and smaller slip failures. The chronology of events suggests the recurrence of multiple smaller tsunamis within relatively short time periods, interrupted by long periods of strain accumulation followed by giant tsunamis. The data demonstrates that the 2004 tsunami was just the latest in a sequence of devastating tsunamis stretching back to at least the early Holocene and suggests a high likelihood for future tsunamis in the Indian Ocean. The sediments preserved in the costal cave provide a unique opportunity to refine our understanding of the behaviour of the Sunda megathrust, as well as study in detail the sedimentology and hydrological characteristics of tsunami deposits.

Figure 1: Tectonic setting and ruptures of major earthquakes along the Sunda megathrust.
figure1
The pink patch is the estimated rupture area of the 2004 Indian Ocean earthquake6. The red patch is the estimated rupture area of the 2005 Nias–Simeulue earthquake60. Orange and green patches show the area of the 1881 and 1907 earthquakes. Yellow circles show the location of the 2002, 2008 and 2010 eathquakes. Solid lines depict primary faults generalized from Singh et al.61. Pivot line shows location of uplift and subsidence of the seafloor during the 2004 earthquake5. Relative plate motion is from Prawirodirdjo and Bock62.

Full size image
Results
Geologic setting
The coastal cave site is located along the northwestern coast of Aceh Province near the village of Lhong, 35 km south of Banda Aceh (Fig. 2). This segment of the Sunda megathrust (Fig. 1) slipped as much as 20 m during the 2004 rupture6,7 and produced nearly 1 m of subsidence. The 2004 tsunami inundated the cave and removed vegetation off the very steep limestone cliff to a height of ∼24 m above mean tidal level (MTL) which was over 10 m above the top of the cave entrance (Fig. 2). The cave entrance is 100 m back from the swash zone with a rock sill at its entrance that sits 1 m above mean tidal level (Fig. 2). The cave extends nearly 120 m into the cliff. We excavated six trenches at the rear of the cave (Fig. 2) and found sedimentary sequences up to 2 m thick above a limestone basement.

Figure 2: Map showing site locations and topography of the cave site.
figure2
(a) Location of coastal cave site and buried soils from the northwestern coast of Aceh Province12. (b) Photograph of the coastal cave entrance and the 2004 trim line. The trim line is about 10 m above the entrance to the cave. (c) Topographic map of the coastal cave site. (d) Map showing excavations in the coastal cave. (e) Topographic profile from the swash zone to the coastal cave.

Full size image
2004 tsunami deposit
The 2004 tsunami deposited a sand bed in all trenches, which was 20–43 cm thick. The 2004 tsunami sand bed is laterally continuous, well-sorted, composed of fine to very fine grained sand. In the trench nearest the cave entrance (Trench 6), the 2004 tsunami sand bed has three pulses of coarse material followed by subsequent fining upwards sequences (Fig. 3; Supplementary Fig. 1; Supplementary Tables 1 and 2). Basal rip-up clasts, lenticular laminations and fragments of weathered cave chalk are common in the 2004 sand bed in all trenches. The 2004 sand bed contains abundant, pristine foraminifera, mostly of benthic subtidal origin23, but with a notable planktonic offshore presence. Organic debris, transported into the cave by the tsunami and guano from the insect-feeding bats (Microchiroptera) that inhabit the cave, littered the surface of the 2004 tsunami deposit. The basal contact of the 2004 deposit is an erosional unconformity.

Figure 3: 2004 Indian Ocean tsunami deposit.
figure3
Photograph showing three coarse pulses and fining upwards sequences exposed in Trench 6. Grain size samples for the 2004 deposit collected from Trench 6 are shown in Supplementary Table 3. See Fig. 2 for location of Trench 6.

Full size image
Prehistoric tsunami deposits
Beneath the 2004 tsunami deposit, we found an additional 11 sand beds (A–K) that we interpret as tsunami deposits (Fig. 4). The 11 sand beds consist of well-sorted, normally graded, very fine sand to silt with a sharp basal contact. There is no evidence of unconformities in the stratigraphic sequences from the trench-wall exposures (Supplementary Figs 1 and 2). Sand beds G–J have thin deposits (2–7 cm), whereas sand bed F has the thickest deposit (23 cm). Some of the sand beds have a rip-up clast-rich lower portion and a lenticular-laminated upper portion. The rip-up clasts are very similar to the deposits that underlie them. Large detrital weathered fragments of cave chalk are preserved in the sand beds. Foraminifera are abundant, in particular in sand beds I–K (Fig. 5; Supplementary Tables 3 and 4). The provenance of the foraminifera ranges from intertidal to subtidal to offshore23. A large percentage of the foraminiferal assemblage in each sand bed is pristine (Fig. 5).

Figure 4: Coastal cave stratigraphic units and the tsunami sand beds.
figure4
(a) Stratigraphic units showing the 11 tsunami sand beds (A–K) and the 2004 tsunami deposit. Red numbers refer to the radiocarbon samples (Table 1). (b) Photomosaic of Trench 1 showing location of the 11 sand beds, A–K. See Fig. 2 for location of Trench 1.

Full size image
Figure 5: Stratigraphic and microfossil evidence for tsunamis.
figure5
Vertical arrows show fining upwards sand and horizontal arrows indicate coarse sand pulse. Average thickness of units taken from Trench 1 vertical exposures, trench walls A, B, C and D. Grain size from Supplementary Table 1; foraminifera data from Supplement Table 2.

Full size image
Intercalated beds
Organic-rich beds are found between the 11 sand beds (A–K), reflecting slow sediment accumulation during intervals between tsunamis. The organic beds are commonly finely laminated and range in thickness from <1 mm to 9 cm (Fig. 4; Supplementary Figs 1 and 2). The intercalated beds consist of sands, reworked by periodic drips of water through the cave ceiling during periods of high precipitation and insect burrowing. The organics were likely produced by the same processes that produce organic debris on the surface of the 2004 tsunami and have been broken down by post-depositional processes. Foraminifera are absent or in low abundances with a fragmented and abraded assemblage of intertidal to subtidal to offshore species (Fig. 5), further suggesting the intercalated beds are reworked from the tsunami sand beds A–K. In many intercalated beds, we found small, pristine and fragile chalk florets.

Four mud beds appear between sand beds B–H with thicknesses up to 25 cm (Figs 4 and 5; Supplementary Figs 1 and 2). The upper contact of the mud beds is sharp and locally eroded, consistent with the presence of rip-up clasts within the overlying tsunami sand beds. In two mud beds foraminifera are present in low abundances, dominated by , intertidal assemblages (Fig. 5; Supplementary Tables 3 and 4). However, foraminifera are absent in the other two mud beds, suggesting deposition by freshwater ponding in the cave. Pristine cave chalk is found in some mud beds, further supporting deposition in low-energy conditions.

Chronological constraints
We obtained accelerator mass spectrometry (AMS) radiocarbon ages on pieces of detrital charcoal and whole molluscs from within, below and above the sand beds (Fig. 6; Table 1). We interpret the two bracketing dates as maximum and minimum ages for the timing of sand bed deposition. Fragments of charcoal from an organic-rich bed at the base of the sedimentary sequence yield a maximum age of 7,672–7,588 years BP for sand bed A. Charcoal from a mud bed (5,583–5,331 years BP) is the maximum age for sand F. A pristine mollusc shell within the sand bed F provide an age of 5,258–4,552 years BP. Charcoal yield ages of 3,362–3,246 years BP and 3,363–3,245 years BP for sand beds G and H, respectively. Multiple charcoal dates from sand beds I, J and K provide age ranges of 3,366–3,221 years BP, 3,464–3,068 years BP and 2,975–2,772 years BP, respectively.

Figure 6: Bayesian model showing timing of tsunamis.
figure6
(a) We use a custom Bayesian model for sand beds A–K that simultaneously calibrates all radiocarbon dates, incorporates the law of superposition and the constraints of limiting dates, which lie between or beyond the range of the directly dated tsunamis (Methods section). The model is fitted using a Markov chain Monte Carlo approach55,63. Radiocarbon ages calibrated with Calib rev. 6.0.0 (ref. 53), age ranges appear with 95.4% highest density region (HDR) (∼2 s.d.), where years ‘before present’ (BP) is years before A.D. 1950 (Table 1). (b) Sediment thickness of the sand beds and the 2004 Indian Ocean tsunami deposit. The stratigraphic thickness is the average thickness across 29 vertical sections in Trench 1 Faces A and C (Supplementary Table 5).

Full size image
Table 1 Radiocarbon analyses of charcoal and shells.
Full size table
Discussion
Coastal caves have not previously yielded prehistoric records of tsunamis. Indeed, the cave’s sheltered location and absence of human activity suggest that these sand beds represent the best-preserved and most complete tsunami history for the Indian Ocean between 7,400 and 2,900 years BP. The cave’s interior protects the tsunami deposits from erosion. The rock sill near the cave entrance (Fig. 2) mitigated the erosional impact of tsunamis that are found at elevations beneath the sill. However, deposits above the rock sill are vulnerable to scouring from subsequent events. The cave’s location also disfavours sand bed deposition or re-working by intense storms12,14. Exposure to tropical cyclones is limited due to the lack of Coriolis force near the equator24,25. In addition, the track of any tropical cyclones that originate in Indian Ocean will move towards India, Bangladesh or Myanmar without producing a storm surge in Sumatra14,26. Although tropical cyclones do strike eastern Thailand, they dissipate after crossing the Malay Peninsula and Sumatra before moving offshore along Sumatra’s west coast (for example, tropical storm Vamei in 2001 (refs 27, 28)).

The stratigraphic and microfossil data of the 11 prehistoric sand beds (A–K) resemble the 2004 tsunami as well as tsunami deposits described elsewhere. Rip-up clasts at the base of sand beds and sharp basal contacts suggest erosion occurred at the beginning of the tsunami inundation as the surge entered the cave. Normally graded sand beds indicate settling from suspension following tsunami inundation in the cave9,29. The normal grading suggests that each bed resulted from a single (rather than multiple) instance of the cave filling with water and draining. The foraminifera assemblage of the sand beds were dominated by intertidal to subtidal to offshore species. Marine foraminifera often dominate tsunami deposits because of the landward transport and deposition of scoured marine sediment23,30. The taphonomic (or surface) condition of individual foraminifera distinguishes the tsunami sand beds and the intercalated beds (Fig. 5). The foraminifera of the tsunami sand beds is predominantly pristine suggesting the foraminifera were entrained from a protected subtidal substrate31,32.

We have also identified cave chalk weathering as a new indicator of tsunami inundation. Large fragments of weathered cave chalk are preserved in the sand beds. These fragments most likely fell from the cave ceiling and were weathered due to abrasion by tsunami transport. In contrast, we found pristine and fragile chalk florets in the organic and mud beds.

Holocene relative sea-level reconstructions from the Indo-Pacific region are characterized by a mid-Holocene sea-level high stand of a few decimetres to several metres33,34, but the presence or absence of such a highstand may be controlled by local tectonic processes35. A record of buried soils from the northwestern coast of Aceh Province suggest that relative sea-level rose during the early and mid-Holocene from −5 m at ∼7,900 years BP to −1.6 m at ∼5,700 years BP12. Relative sea-level was below present until at least 3,800 years BP. In the late Holocene, relative sea-level stabilized within 0.4 m of modern sea-level12,22,33. This gradual long-term relative sea-level rise without a mid-Holocene highstand created a time-window for tsunami deposits and intercalated beds to aggrade without a significant interruption in sedimentation36 (Fig. 7).

Figure 7: Model of tsunamis deposits in cave interior.
figure7
Our model shows the development of accommodation space and the accumulation of stacked tsunami beds A–K and the 2004 Indian Ocean tsunami in the coast cave.

Full size image
The cave probably contained stratigraphic evidence of recent historic tsunamis from 2,900 years BP to the 2004 Indian Ocean tsunami that have been identified elsewhere in the region10,14, but these were most likely removed by subsequent tsunamis inundating the cave as indicated by the erosional unconformity beneath the 2004 deposit (Figs 4 and 7; Supplementary Fig. 1). The missing stratigraphic record coincides with the continued aggradation of the nearby coastal plain12. Stratigraphical records of late Holocene tsunamis are generally restricted to environments with sufficient accommodation space, such as intervening coastal swales between ridges10,14, estuaries and ponds where overwash deposits are protected from erosion by rapid growth of vegetation or deposition of sediment36.

Independent evidence for tsunami inundation in the cave comes from stratigraphy of nearby coastal lowlands12,37. Three coseismic subsidence events and seven tsunamis between ∼7,500 and 3,800 years BP are documented in the stratigraphy of the west coast of northern Sumatra12. During this time interval, the cave sequence preserves an identical number of tsunamis (that is, sand beds A–G; Fig. 6 and Table 1). Offshore of Sumatra, Patton et al.38 identified 11 deep-sea turbidites along the Andaman–Aceh slip patch between ∼6,500 and 2,700 years BP. Although the number of events is the same, the timing of the events is different. The deep-sea turbidite record does not capture the tightly clustered tsunamis (sand beds G–J) and the large gap in time between tsunamis F and G. The discrepancies suggest that ruptures along the Sunda megathrust do not always trigger both tsunami deposits and turbidites.

Since the 2004 tsunami, considerable evidence for prehistoric tsunamis has been obtained from sites around the Indian Ocean13,14,15,16,18,20,21,39,40,41,42,43. However, studies with time spans comparable to the cave are restricted to Sri Lanka19 and the Maldives21. In southern Sri Lanka, Jackson et al.19, identified seven tsunami sand beds between ∼6,700 and 2,400 year BP. Klostermann et al.21 identified three tsunami sand beds between ∼5,600 and ∼2,900 years BP in the Maldives. However, these far-field records do not capture the tightly clustered tsunamis (sand beds G–J) and have events that span the large gap in time between tsunami sand beds F and G. The far-field seismic sources for these tsunamis are uncertain. For example, slip along the megathrust near the Andaman–Nicobar Islands are potential seismic sources for tsunamis in Sri Lanka and the Maldives44. In addition, the faults along the southern coast of Pakistan are potential seismic sources for tsunamis in the Maldives44. The immediate proximity of the cave to the Sunda megathrust provides a more reliable indicator of tsunamis generated by ruptures of the megathrust than far-field records.

The chronology from accelerator mass spectrometry (AMS) radiocarbon ages from the sand beds of the coastal cave and the stratigraphy of the nearby coastal lowlands12,37, combined within a Bayesian framework (Fig. 6; Methods section), provides the chronology of tsunamis between 7,400 and 2,900 years BP (Table 1). The chronology suggests an average recurrence interval of 456 years between 7,400 and 2,900 years BP with a large uncertainty (95% C.I. 1–2,210) (Fig. 6; Supplementary Table 7). A similar average recurrence interval (600–900 years) was estimated from the nearby coastal lowlands of northwestern Aceh Province between 7,400 and 3,800 years BP12. The tsunami record from Sri Lanka19 suggested an average recurrence interval of ∼360 years between 6,600 and 4,200 year BP.

The tsunami record from the cave, however, indicates a dramatic variation in recurrence interval. Between 7,400 and 5,500 years BP, the recurrence interval for tsunamis A to F was 681 years (95% C.I. 11–2,222) (Fig. 6). But after 5,500 years BP, the coastal cave has an age gap of 2,164 years (95% C.I. 1,997–2,247) between tsunamis F and G. Four tightly clustered tsunamis (G–J) occurred between 3,400 and 3,300 years BP with an average recurrence interval of 16 years (95% C.I. 0–55). The most recent tsunami (K) recorded in the coastal cave occurred at 2,900 years BP, with a recurrence interval of 426 years (95% C.I. 357–505). Although the time span of the northern Simeulue coral microatoll record is limited to the last millennium, it shows a similar large variation of recurrence intervals from 56 years to ∼550 years39.

There is a correlation between the thickness of tsunami sand beds and recurrence intervals in the cave (Fig. 6). The thinner sand beds (G–J) have the smallest recurrence intervals and were preceded by the largest age gap between tsunamis (Supplementary Fig. 4). The thickest sand bed (F) preceded the large age gap, with a thickness similar to the 2004 tsunami sand bed. Although variations of offshore sediment availability or lateral shoreline changes might play a role in the thickness of tsunami beds45, we suggest that the thickness of the sand beds may reflect the size of slip along the megathrust. It is possible that sand bed F was deposited by a giant tsunami produced by a large slip that was followed by a very long dormant, interseimic period with substantial strain accumulation. Subsequently, partial, smaller slip failures occurred in rapid succession between 3,400 and 3,300 years BP, producing sand beds G–J. The very long dormant period suggests that the Sunda megathrust is capable of accumulating large slip deficits between earthquakes. Such a high slip rupture would produce a substantially larger earthquake than the 2004 event.

The dramatic variation in tsunami recurrence intervals suggests a continuum of recurrence behaviour from large slip ruptures (2004 tsunami and sand bed F), earthquake super cycles or doublet earthquake2,4,11,39 to smaller slip failures (for example, sand beds G–J) similar to the October 2010 Mentawai tsunamigenic earthquake (Fig. 1). Variations in recurrence may result from temporal changes in coupling or locking depth, or very long-term slow non-tsunamigenic slip events46,47. If thickness of the tsunami deposit (Fig. 6) reflects slip and the size of the slip patch, the thickness of the 2004 tsunami deposit implies a long dormant period until the next large slip event. Slow non-tsunamigenic slip events might predominate during such long periods of quiescence and precede clustering smaller slip failures along the megathrust. The remarkable variability of recurrence suggests that regional hazard mitigation plans should be based upon the high likelihood of future destructive tsunami demonstrated by the cave record and other paleotsunami sites, rather than estimates of recurrence intervals.

Methods
Field methods and data collection
The evidence for prehistoric tsunamis is derived principally from stratigraphic relations found in six trench-wall exposures and other smaller pits in the cave. The stratigraphy is visually striking, because of a strong contrast in colour between alternating beds of sand, mud and laminated organic sand (Supplementary Figs 1 and 2).

We identified and described stratigraphic units in Trench 1 and the trench walls were mapped from high-resolution photos of the vertical surfaces. The alternating beds of sand, clay and laminated organic sand allow stratigraphic correlation of individual beds within the trench-wall exposure (Supplementary Figs 1 and 2). We divided the stratigraphy into 12 units, from Unit 1, which is the oldest and deepest, resting on the limestone bedrock of the cave, through Unit 12, which is the youngest unit that underlies the 2004 Indian Ocean tsunami sand bed (Fig. 5). Column samples were taken across each stratigraphic interface, providing samples for grain size, microfossil and chronology.

Topographic data were based on a total station survey in 2011 and 2012 (Fig. 2). Excavation of six trenches within the cave interior was conducted in 2011 and 2012. We made measurements of sedimentology and stratigraphy in the field.

Tsunami sand beds
We use several lines of stratigraphic evidence that point to a tsunami origin for sand beds A–K that includes stratigraphic relations, lithology, degree of sorting, internal structures, such as fining upwards beds, rip-up clasts of mud, sharpness of stratigraphic contacts, uniformity in bed thickness and lateral continuity of beds8,48,49,50. In addition, we use secondary features such as liquefaction, bedding-plane faults (décollements) and normal faults that are perhaps triggered by seismic shaking8.

We analysed foraminiferal assemblages (Fig. 5; Supplementary Tables 3 and 4) from most units to confirm marine inundation and indicate the provenance of the overwash sands32. In addition, we used foraminiferal test taphonomy51 to reveal depositional and post-depositional environmental conditions (Supplementary Fig. 3; Supplementary Tables 3 and 4). The foraminiferal analyses help constrain sediment provenance and help identify tsunami sands in a variety of environmental settings.

We used the taphonomy of cave chalk as a new indicator of the environment of deposition. The cave chalk found in the sedimentary units most likely fell from the cave ceiling due to weathering. The chalk occurs in two forms: (1) small, fragile, pristine florets; and (2) large detrital rounded fragments that do not have a delicate floret structure (Supplementary Fig. 3). Since the florets do not show evidence of water transport (for example, rounding), we suggest that the delicate florets are limited to sand beds not deposited by tsunamis. In contrast, the rounded chalk fragments are only found in sand beds that were produced by a tsunami. We believe the rounding of the fragments is due to abrasion by the tsunami waves.

Grain size and thickness data allows comparison of the 2004 tsunami sediments with the prehistoric sand beds (Figs 5 and 6; Supplementary Table 1). Further, the general fining upwards trends in many tsunami beds suggests deposition by tsunami waves (Fig. 5; Supplementary Table 1). Following an initial high water flow, a decreased flow velocity often causes sand beds to deposit in graded, fining upwards sequences9,52. For example, along the Aceh coastline, the 2004 tsunami sand bed records distinct fining upwards sequences of sand deposition52, similar to the 2004 tsunami sand bed preserved in the coastal cave. Samples for foraminifera, cave chalk and grain size analyses are from Trenches 1 and 4 (Fig. 5; Supplementary Tables 1, 2, 3 and 4).

Radiocarbon dating
We collected detrital charcoal fragments from seven stratigraphic units (Units 1, 5, 8, 9, 10 and 11), and two intact gastropods from Unit 6. The radiocarbon ages constrain ages of tsunamis; calibrated radiocarbon ages helped constrain the timing of tsunamis. Detrital charcoal and gastropods were collected from units for radiocarbon dating and were analysed by GNS, Rafter Radiocarbon Laboratory, New Zealand (Table 1).

We calibrated radiocarbon ages with Calib rev. 6.0.0 (ref. 53). The calibrated age ranges appear with 95.4% HDR (∼2 standard deviations), where years ‘before present’ (BP) is years before A.D. 1950 (Table 1). Also, we corrected the ages of the gastropod shells for the marine reservoir effect using a ΔR value of 15±119 (ref. 54) to account for the fact that Indian Ocean waters show substantial 14C depletion due to upwelling.

To further constrain chronology, we analysed the organic guano beds derived from insect-feeding bats that occupy the coastal cave. We sampled six organic-rich beds along thin stratigraphic horizons (3–6 mm). Although the radiocarbon analyses indicate the dark sand beds are broadly mid-late Holocene in age, three radiocarbon dates are not consistent with stratigraphic position. We suggest that the discrepancies of the bulk guano dates are due to: (1) bulk samples containing an unknown mixture of organic material of variable age, and representing an average age of the sample; and (2) groundwater percolating along cracks in the limestone cave, and introducing exogenous, old carbon into the organic beds.

Bayesian age-depth model
We apply a Bayesian age-depth model to 19 radiocarbon dates from the coastal cave and the nearby coastal lowlands12. The radiocarbon dates either directly date a tsunami or provide maximum or minimum age limits for a tsunamis (Fig. 6; Table 1) (Supplementary Tables 6 and 7). Our Bayesian modelling approach provides control over the model fitting process and flexibility in the modelling assumptions. The code is available at https://github.com/andrewcparnell/tsunamis.

We use the following notation to build our model. θi is the calendar age of tsunami i, where i runs from 1 to 11. These are the parameters we are most interested in estimating. Together, we write these values as θ. xij is the direct radiocarbon date j of tsunami i, where j=1,…,ni with ni the number of direct dates for tsunami i. These values have associated fixed 1-sigma errors σij. Note, that for some tsunamis there are no direct dates, in which case ni=0. Thus, while we have 13 direct dates in total, five tsunamis are without direct dates. Together, we write these values as x.  are the calendar ages of limiting dates lying between tsunamis i and i+1. They are nuisance parameters. Together, we write these values as θ.  is a limiting radiocarbon date j lying between tsunamis i and i+1. These values have associated fixed 1-sigma errors . Here , where  represents the number of limiting dates for tsunami i. As above, some of these are 0. Together, we write these values as x. γi are the calendar age shifts of the limiting dates which provide a maximum age of tsunami i. They are nuisance parameters which we write together as γ.  is a limiting radiocarbon date j for tsunami i, providing evidence of a maximum age. These values have associated fixed 1-sigma errors . Here  where  represents the number of limiting dates for tsunami i. Again, some of the  values are 0, as we have only three such dates. Together we write these values as . Note that the calibrated value of a radiocarbon age  is θi+γi, that is, the calendar age of the tsunami plus a shift indicating how much older the radiocarbon date is beyond that of the tsunami itself. r(θ) is the IntCal13 calibration curve which has the probability distribution r(θ)∼N(μ(θ),τ2(θ)).We assume that both μ() and τ2() are known functions.

Our overall goal is to find the posterior distribution:


where




are the likelihood terms. The prior distribution π(θ) is set to enforce the ordering of the dates:


where I is an indicator function. The prior distribution on the excesses γi is the only informative prior in the model. We use:


which corresponds to a gamma distribution with a mean of 200 and a s.d. of 200. While this distribution is diffuse, it is informative for the maximum ages. The distribution corresponds to a 95% probability that the maximum ages are no more than 600 years older than the tsunami they are aiming to represent.

Our model is fitted with Markov chain Monte Carlo using Metropolis-Hastings steps for all parameters since ordering the tsunami dates was complicated by their prior distribution55. The model is sensitive to starting values of the parameters due to the ordering constraint, so we simulate suitable values by calibrating dates individually, and sampling from these distributions with an extra restriction on the ordering. We run the model with multiple different starting values, and check convergence using trace plots and the Geweke convergence diagnostic55. The final model run created 1 million iterations, removing 100,000 for a burn-in period and then keeping only every 450th iteration.

2004 tsunami sand bed
The 2004 tsunami sand bed ranges from about 20 to 43 cm in thickness in trench-wall exposures (Fig. 3; Supplementary Figs 1 and 2). It is a light grey, normally graded fine to very fine sand (mean=2.7Φ; % sand=91.9%), with abundant laminations, some of which can be traced more than a metre.

In Trench 6, the 2004 tsunami sand bed records three distinct beds (Fig. 3), delineated by three pulses of coarse material followed by subsequent fining upwards sequences (Fig. 3; Supplementary Table 1). We interpret each combined coarse pulse and fining upwards sequence as individual tsunami waves. The first coarse pulse at the base of the 2004 sand (41–42 cm) is marked by an influx of fine to medium sand (mean=2.1Φ; % sand=94.1%), which fines upwards until 34 cm (mean=2.7Φ; % sand=90.6%). The second coarse pulse occurs from 31–33 cm (mean=2.3Φ; % sand=95.6%) and fines slightly up to 24 cm (mean=2.7Φ; % sand=92.5%). The final coarse pulse is located between 22 and 24 cm (mean=2.5Φ; % sand=96.3%), and fines upwards to a very fine sand (mean=3.7Φ; % sand=74.0%) at the top of the sequence (0–1 cm).

Rip-up clasts, consisting of organic-rich granules, wood and shells are common, especially in the lower part of the 2004 deposit. Abundant (2,500–3,246 individuals per 1 cm3) foraminifera that are predominantly pristine (41–52%) and sourced from subtidal (52–58%), intertidal (33–38%) and offshore (for example, planktic) (8–14%) environments are present, as are weathered fragments of cave chalk (Fig. 5, Supplementary Fig. 3; Supplementary Table 4). The 2004 sand has the highest diversity foraminiferal assemblage, with Pararotalia sp., Amphistegina sp. and Calcarina sp. dominating. A sharp and erosional contact marks the boundary between the 2004 tsunami sand and the underlying Unit 11. The erosional removal of pre-2004 sediment is variably preserved in trenches and on the cave walls as alternating remnants of sand and organic-rich sand.

Unit 1 sand bed A
The lowest stratigraphic unit (Unit 1) above the limestone cave floor is an irregular, laminated, dark, organic layer. Overlying the Unit 1 organic layer is fine sand (Unit 1.1; mean=3.0Φ; % sand=77.4%) that does not contain foraminifera or cave chalk. Unit 1.2 is discontinuous marine-influenced clay (grain size data not available) that pinches out toward the corner of Trench 1. The clay bed contains relatively low numbers of foraminifera (20 individuals per 1 cm3). The species assemblage is dominated by intertidal (71%) and subtidal (29%) species, with a paucity of planktic and deeper-dwelling benthic foraminifera. The taphonomic assemblage is dominated by abraded (52%) and fragmented (48%) individuals, with no pristine individuals present (Fig. 5; Supplementary Table 1). Unit 1.2 is devoid of cave chalk.

Unit 1.2 is overlain by a 5.4 cm thick fine sand (Unit 1.3; mean=2.9Φ; % sand=74.9%) with sparse laminations and abundant rip-up clasts derived from the underlying clay. The lower stratigraphic contact between Unit 1.3 and the underlying clay is sharp (∼2 mm), along an erosional and irregular surface. On the basis of the abundance of rip-up clasts, we interpret Unit 1.3 as the oldest tsunami bed, labelled Sand Bed A. Unit 1.3 sand contains a low number of foraminifera (21–62 individuals per 1 cm3) consisting predominantly of subtidal (38–58%) and intertidal (41–62%) species. The assemblage is dominated by the subtidal species Epinoides sp., Cibicides lobatulus and Pararotalia spp., with a near absence of planktics. Individual foraminifera were both abraded (68–77%) and fragmented (14–30%), with only 2–9% in pristine condition (Fig. 5; Supplementary Table 3). Overlying Unit 1.3 (sand bed A) is a laminated, dark, organic layer (Unit 1.4; mean=2.3Φ; % sand=85.0%); the contact between the units is gradational over a few centimetres.

Angular fragments of detrital charcoal from Unit 1.1 yielded a calibrated age range of 7,650–7,510 cal. years BP (Table 1), which we interpret as the maximum age of Sand Bed A or Unit 1.3.

Unit 2 sand bed B
Units 2.0 and 2.1 consist of a dark, red to brown sand with laminations of varying thickness. The grain size is fine sand (Units 2 and 2.1: mean=2.6Φ; % sand=85.1%). The units contain abundant delicate (pristine) cave chalk florets (Fig. 5; Supplementary Fig. 3) that suggest a non-tsunami source for the sand. These units have moderate abundances of foraminifera (68–94 individuals per 1 cm3), and are dominated by intertidal species (55–66%), which are mostly abraded (49–58%) and fragmented (31–34%) (Fig. 5; Supplementary Tables 3 and 4), and probably reworked from Sand Bed A (Unit 1.3).

Overlying Unit 2.1 is a ∼6 cm thick fining upwards, fine to very fine sand (Unit 2.2; mean=3.5Φ; % sand=75.2%; Supplementary Fig. 1; Supplementary Table 1). Along the base of Unit 2.2, pebble-sized clay rip-up clasts are abundant. Locally, Unit 2.2 grades into a thin, discontinuous dark sand. Unit 2.2 contains weathered cave chalk and moderate abundances of foraminifera (76–89 individuals per 1 cm3) from subtidal (41–47%) and intertidal (51–59%) environments (Fig. 5; Supplementary Tables 3 and 4). Unlike the underlying Unit 2.1 foraminiferal-bearing sediments, species within Unit 2.2 (Fig. 5) include the deeper-dwelling Lagena sp., and Operculina ammonoides. The rip-up clasts, normal grading and the presence of subtidal foraminifera and weathered cave chalk in Unit 2.2 imply deposition by a tsunami (sand Bed B). However, the foraminiferal assemblage of sand bed B, unlike most other candidate tsunami sand beds in the cave sequence, is mostly fragmented (47–55%), and contains only minor abundances of pristine individuals (9–12%). The contact between Unit 2.2 and the overlying Unit 3 clay is sharp (∼2 mm), but irregular.

Unit 3 sand bed C
The base of Unit 3 consists of a 3.6 cm thick marine-influenced clayey mud (mean=4.2Φ; % clay=11.9; % silt=34.7). Although in low abundance (32–55 individuals per 1 cm3), the presence of foraminifera from intertidal (46–51%) and subtidal (49–54%) environments, many of which were pristine (43–45%), implies deposition in a quiet intertidal environment. Cave chalk at the bottom of Unit 3 is absent, but present as pristine florets at the top. Overying Unit 3 is a 9.2 cm thick, slightly normal graded, fine sand (Unit 3.1: mean=2.0Φ; % sand=87.5%) which grades into a massive to faintly laminated fine sand over a few centimetres (Unit 3.2; mean=2.5Φ; % sand=85.9%) (Fig. 5; Supplementary Table 1). The base of Unit 3.1 contains abundant pebble-sized angular rip-up clasts from underlying mud (mean=4.2Φ; % sand=53.3%). Scouring of Unit 3 clayey mud before deposition of Unit 3.1 is clear in several places in Trench 1. The sand of Units 3.1 and 3.2 contains weathered cave chalk and abundant (146–412 individuals per 1 cm3) foraminifera that are predominantly pristine (32–41%) and from subtidal (46–61%), intertidal (37–45%) and planktic (2–9%) environments (Fig. 5; Supplementary Table 3). Dominant species include Elphidium craticulatum, Cibicides lobatulus and Epinoides repandus. The abundance of rip-up clasts, graded bedding, subtidal foraminifera and weathered cave chalk suggests a tsunami origin for Units 3.1 and 3.2, labelled Sand Bed C. Overlying Unit 3.2 is a laminated fine organic-rich sand (Unit 4: mean=2.3Φ; % sand=90.2%) that is devoid of foraminifera and cave chalk, and has a sharp (∼2 mm) but irregular contact.

Unit 4 sand bed D
The base of Unit 4 consists of a 4-cm thick, laminated, organic-rich sand. The laminations are clear but discontinuous, and vary from black to dark red-brown. Thickness also varies markedly, from <1–12 cm. The sand lacks foraminifera and cave chalk. Overlying Unit 4 is a 3-cm thick, fine sand (Unit 4.1; mean=2.5Φ; % sand=86.8%; Fig. 5, Supplementary Table 1). The stratigraphic contact between Unit 4.1 fine sand and the underlying Unit 4 is sharp (a few mm), along an irregular surface. Unit 4.1 contains a low number of foraminifera (19 individuals per 1 cm3). Many of the tests are abraded (78%) and fragmented (22%), and no pristine individuals were found. Where present, foraminifera were of intertidal (83%; Ammonia convexa, Ammonia parkinsoniana) or subtidal (17%; Pararotalia sp.) origin (Fig. 5; Supplementary Table 4). No cave chalk was observed in Unit 4.1. On the basis of the presence of fine sand, with a basal erosional contact and subtidal foraminifera in Unit 4.1, we infer a speculative tsunami, labelled Sand Bed D (Supplementary Fig. 1). Overlying Unit 4.1 is a clayey mud (Unit 5) with a sharp (∼2 mm), but irregular contact.

Unit 5 sand bed E
Unit 5 consists of an extensive non-marine clayey mud. The clayey mud is 11 cm thick, but varies in thickness from 4 to 15 cm. The massive clay contains pristine cave chalk, but no foraminifera and was likely deposited by ponding water in the cave resulting from periods of increased precipitation. The upper contact of the clay is smooth and displays only minor, local evidence of erosion. Overlying the clayey mud is a massive 3-cm thick, very fine sand (Unit 5.1; mean=3.4Φ; % sand=72.9%), that has a low foraminiferal assemblage (35–42 individuals per 1 cm3; Fig. 5, Supplementary Tables 1 and 3). The foraminifera are highly abraded (63–66%), and predominantly from an intertidal (Ammonia parkinsoniana and Elphidium advenum) environment (56–62%). Unit 5.1 is devoid of cave chalk. On the basis of the presence of massive sand and marine foraminifera, we speculate that Unit 5.1 (labelled Sand Bed E) represents deposition as a result of a tsunami. The absence of rip-up clasts from the underlying clay suggests that the flow of the water in the cave was too weak to erode the underlying clay. In addition, it is hard to explain how the massive sand could have been deposited from other processes so far back into the cave. Overlying Unit 5.1 is a 3-cm thick, laminated, very fine sand that varies from black, guano-rich lamina to reddish brown, inorganic lamina (Unit 5.2: mean=4.0Φ; % sand=58.3%). Along other trench wall exposures, a thin, massive, fine sand (Unit 5.3: no grain size data available) overlies Unit 5.1. The fine sand lacks rip-up clasts, and contains fragments of pristine cave chalk and a very low number (2 individuals per 1 cm3) of abraded (100%) foraminifera, representing reworking of older units. The contact between Unit 5.1 (sand bed E) and the overlying units is irregular. Overlying the thin organic-rich fine sand (Unit 5.2) are the thickest non-marine clayey mud beds exposed in the cave sedimentary sequence (Units 5.4 and 5.5; no grain size data available) (Supplementary Figs 1 and 2). Their combined thickness ranges up to about 25 cm. The clayey mud is differentiated into two separate units based upon their colour: the upper part of the clayey mud (that is, Unit 5.3) is darker (more organic) than the lower part of the clay (Unit 5.4). Both units are devoid of foraminifera and were likely deposited by the same processes that formed Unit 5. The units lack cave chalk.

Fragments of detrital charcoal from the overlying Unit 5.4 clayey mud yielded a calibrated age range of 5,583–5,331 years BP, which we interpret as the minimum age of sand bed E.

Further evidence from secondary folding of Units 5.1 and 5.2 and the truncation of these units along the top of Unit 5.3 clayey mud suggests local ground shaking (Supplementary Fig. 2c). On the basis of the intact stratigraphic continuity of Units 5.3 and 5.4, ground shaking must have occurred before the deposition of Unit 5.3.

Unit 6 sand bed F
Overlying the clayey mud units is a 23-cm thick sequence of two sand beds (Unit 6) with rip-up clasts and subtidal and planktic foraminifera. Together, Unit 6 sand beds are the thickest in Trenches 1 and 4 (Fig. 6b; Supplementary Figs 1 and 2; Supplementary Table 5). Thicknesses range up to 30 cm in Trench 1 to about 20 cm in Trench 4. The lower sand of Unit 6 is a massive, fine sand (mean=2.9Φ; % sand=78.9%) with abundant pebble- and cobble-sized rip-up clasts from underlying Units 5.4 and 5.5 (Supplementary Figs 1 and 2; Supplementary Tables 1 and 2). The massive sand grades into a laminated fine sand (mean=2.7Φ; % sand=87.3%). The contact between Unit 6 and the underlying clayey mud (Unit 5.5) is sharp and erosional, over a few centimetres. Unit 6 contains subtidal (43–68%), intertidal (18–53%) and planktic (4–14%) foraminifera (198–296 individuals per 1 cm3) (Fig. 5; Supplementary Tables 3 and 4), with Elphidium advenum, Calcarina spp. and Operculina ammonoides dominating the assemblage. While the Unit 6 lower sand contains weathered fragments of cave chalk, the upper sand is devoid of them. The abundance of rip-up clasts, graded bedding, subtidal foraminifera and weathered cave chalk suggests a tsunami origin for Unit 6, labelled sand bed F. Similarly to other sand units that represent tsunami deposits, including the 2004 tsunami deposit, the majority of foraminifera are generally pristine (41–69%). Overlying Unit 6 (Supplementary Figs 1 and 2; sand bed F) is a <2.0-cm thick, black, organic sand that grades into a heterogeneous, laminated, grey sand (Unit 7). The contact between Unit 6 and the overlying Unit 7 is sharp (a few millimetres) and irregular.

Two pristine gastropod shells from Unit 6 yielded a calibrated ages range of 5,231–4,515 years BP and 5,258–4,552 years BP, which we interpret as the age of Sand Bed F.

Unit 7 sand bed G
Underlying Unit 7.1 or Sand Bed G is a 1.5-cm thick, black, organic, fine sand (Unit 7: mean=2.6Φ; % sand=89.4%) with discontinuous laminations. Its thickness varies from a few millimetres to about 5 cm. The contact between Unit 7 and the overlying Unit 7.1 is sharp (∼2 mm) along an erosional surface. Unit 7.1 consists of irregularly laminated fine sand (mean=3.0Φ; % sand=79.8%) that ranges from 1 to 4 cm in thickness. Unit 7.1 fines upwards from fine sand at the base (mean=2.6Φ; % sand=85.1%) to very fine sand at the top (mean=3.6Φ; % sand=72.8%; Supplementary Fig. 2; Supplementary Tables 1 and 2). Unit 7.1 contains weathered cave chalk and foraminifera (93–105 individuals per 1 cm3) that are dominantly pristine (65–82%) and subtidal (71–77%; Supplementary Fig. 2; Supplementary Table 4). Pararotalia sp. and Cibicides spp. dominate the foraminiferal assemblage. In places, the fine sand laminations are defined by heavy minerals. The normal grading, the presence of subtidal foraminifera and weathered cave chalk imply deposition by a tsunami (Fig. 5 sand bed G). Sand bed G (Unit 7.1) is overlain by a thin clayey mud (Unit 7.2: mean=4.5Φ; % clay=14.7; % silt=34.6) that is laterally discontinuous. Unit 7.2 is devoid of both foraminifera and cave chalk fragments. The contact is gradational over a few millimetres.

Unit 8 sand bed H
Overlying the clayey mud (Unit 7.2) is a ∼4.5-cm thick, massive sand that upwardly fines from fine sand at the base (Unit 8; mean=2.3Φ; % sand=82.3%) to very fine sand at the top (mean=3.8Φ; % sand=71.7%; Supplementary Fig. 2; Supplementary Tables 1 and 2). Weathered fragments of cave chalk that are up to several centimetre in diameter are present in Unit 8 sand. Unit 8 contains moderate abundances (55–62 individuals per 1 cm3) of foraminifera that are almost exclusively from subtidal environments (98–100%), 39–44% of which are pristine (Fig. 5; Supplementary Tables 3 and 4). Dominant species include the deeper-dwelling Lagena sp., Operculina ammonoides and Pararotalia stellata.

The abundance of graded bedding, subtidal foraminifera and weathered cave chalk suggests a tsunami origin for Unit 8, labelled sand bed H (Supplementary Figs 1 and 2). Overlying Unit 8 or Sand bed H is a thin, clayey mud bed (Unit 8.1: mean=4.6Φ; % sand=53.5%) that is only exposed in Trench 4. The contact between Unit 8.1 and the underlying sand bed H (Unit 8.1) is irregular, but sharp over a few millimetres.

Unit 8.2 consists of massive to laminated, very fine sand (mean=3.2Φ; % sand=82.9%). Unit 8.2 is devoid of foraminifera and cave chalk. Unit 8.3 consists of thin, black and grey to dark brown, organic, sandy-mud (mean=5.7Φ; % sand=19.8%), about 2 cm thick. The dark organic sandy-mud contains pristine cave chalk fragments and a low number (20 individuals per 1 cm3) of foraminifera that are generally abraded (96%), and sourced from intertidal (55%) and subtidal (45%) environments. The contact between Unit 8.2 and the overlying Unit 9 sand is sharp and irregular.

Further evidence from a secondary high-angle, normal fault that disrupts Units 1 through 7 (Supplementary Fig. 1e), suggest that faulting occurred before deposition of Units 8 or sand bed H.

Fragments of detrital charcoal from Unit 11 yielded a calibrated age range of 3,362–3,246 years BP, which we interpret as the age of sand bed H.

Unit 9 sand bed I
Unit 9, consists of a light tan, massive, fine sand (mean=2.3Φ; % sand=86.3%), up to 3 cm thick, with weathered detrital fragments of cave chalk, particularly in the upper half of the unit (Supplementary Fig. 2; Supplementary Table 4). Angular fragments of detrital charcoal are also common. Faint laminations are present, in particular at the base of the unit. Unit 9 does, however, locally fill small scours cut into the underlying Unit 8.3 sandy-mud. This indicates minor erosion prior to deposition. Foraminifera are abundant (256 individuals per 1 cm3), and are predominantly subtidal (58%) species (Pararotalia stellata, Epinoides repandus and Cibicides refulgens); ∼44% of the foraminiferal assemblage is pristine (Fig. 5; Supplementary Tables 3 and 4). The presence of fine sand, subtidal foraminifera and weathered cave chalk imply deposition by a tsunami, labelled sand bed I (Fig. 5 band bed I). Unit 9 sand (band bed I) is overlain by a black, organic bed only a few millimetre thick (Unit 9.1: no grain size data), with a sharp contact. A low-abundance assemblage (4 individuals per 1 cm3) consisting of abraded (82%), intertidal (54%), and subtidal (46%) foraminifera and fragments of pristine cave chalk is present in this unit, and were derived from underlying band bed I (Unit 9). Fragments of detrital charcoal from Unit 9 yielded two calibrated age ranges of 3,358–3,221 years BP and 3,366–3,252 years BP, which we interpret as the age of sand Bed I. In addition, fragments of detrital charcoal from the top of Unit 9 sand yielded a calibrated age range of 3,363–3,245 years BP, which we interpret as the maximum age of Sand Bed I.

Further evidence from truncation of Units 8.1, 8.2 and 8.3 suggests a bedding-parallel fault along the top of Unit 8 (Supplementary Fig. 1c). Secondary folding of these units above this bedding-parallel fault implies that displacement occurred after deposition of Unit 8.3 but before deposition of Unit 9 (sand bed I).

Unit 10 sand bed J
Unit 10 is a thin, very fine sand with red-brown laminations (mean=3.2Φ; % sand=75.6%). Unit 10 contains a low abundance (nine individuals per 1 cm3) and weathered (76% fragmented and 24% abraded) foraminiferal assemblage (86% intertidal species), with pristine cave chalk fragments. This unit represents accumulation of bat guano and remobilized sand from the underlying Unit 9 sand. Overlying the red, very fine sand of Unit 10, along a sharp contact, is a thin (2 cm thick), massive fine sand (Unit 10.1; mean=2.8Φ; % sand=85.9%; Supplementary Figs 1 and 2; Supplementary Tables 1 and 2), with abundant pebble-sized fragments of weathered cave chalk. Unit 10.1 sand contains abundant (190 individuals per 1 cm3) foraminifera that are predominantly pristine (53%) and from subtidal (51%) and intertidal (45%) environments, with only a small percentage of planktic species present (4%; Supplementary Fig. 2; Supplementary Tables 3 and 4). Dominant species include Ammonia parkinsoniana, Elphidium craticulatum and Heterolepa sp. The contact with the underlying Unit 10 is sharp. On the basis of the presence of very fine well-sorted sand and subtidal foraminifera, we infer that Unit 10.1 (Fig. 5; labelled sand bed J) represents deposition as a result of a tsunami. Overlying Unit 10.1 (sand bed J) is a black to dark brown, massive, organic, fine sand (Unit 10.2; mean=2.5Φ; % sand=87.8%). Unit 11 has been eroded away from most of the other trench exposures. Unit 10.2 is thin, black to dark brown, massive, organic, fine sand, about 1.5 cm thick, that represents bat guano accumulation and sand remobilization derived from Unit 10.1.

Fragments of detrital charcoal from Unit 10.1 yielded four calibrated ages: 3,464–3,383 years BP, 3,370–3,260 years BP, 3,356–3,219 years BP, 3,236–3,068 years BP. These calibrated ages represent the age of sand bed J. In addition, fragments of detrital charcoal from Unit 10 yielded a calibrated age range of 3,396–3,269 years BP, which we interpret as the maximum age of sand bed J.

Unit 11 sand bed K
Unit 11 is an 8.4-cm thick sequence that fines upwards from a medium sand (Unit 11; mean=1.9Φ; % sand=95.5%) at the base to a fine sand (mean=2.4Φ; % sand=94.3%) with numerous laminations at the top (Supplementary Figs 1 and 2; Supplementary Tables 1 and 2). The unit contains abundant rip-up clasts that are derived from the underlying Unit 10.2. The uppermost laminated, very fine sand is nearly absent in other excavations due to erosion, but it is preserved in most of the Trench 1 exposures (Supplementary Fig. 1). Weathered fragments of cave chalk are abundant and range in size up to 3 cm. Unit 11 also abounds in foraminifera (1,976–2,485 individuals per cm3), and 49–55% of the foraminifera are pristine. Subtidal (48–61%) species are dominant (Pararotalia sp., Asterorotalia sp. and Epinoides repandus) with planktic foraminifera present, but in smaller amounts (9–14%; Fig. 5, Supplementary Tables 3 and 4). On the basis of the normal grading, abundant rip-up clasts and subtidal foraminifera, we suggest that this sand layer represents a tsunami deposit (Fig. 4; labelled sand bed K). Sand bed K (Unit 11) is separated from the overlying black to grey, thin, laminated, fine sand (Unit 12: no grain size data available) by an erosional unconformity. Unit 12 is a massive, fine sandy pebble breccia with an irregular black, organic sand cap. Clasts range up to about 10 cm in length and are commonly angular.

Fragments of detrital charcoal from Unit 11 yielded two calibrated age ranges of 2,859–2,772 years BP and 2,975–2,862 years BP. We interpret these as the age of sand bed K.

Grain size analysis
We analysed grain size at 1 cm resolution with a Malvern MS 3000 laser particle size analyzer (measuring grain sizes up to 1,800 μm). Before analysis, we removed organics and carbonate with 30% hydrogen peroxide and 10% hydrochloric acid, respectively. We subsequently let the samples disaggregate in a sodium hexametaphosphate solution for 24 h.

We calculated grain size values with the Wentworth-Phi scale56, using the average of three runs. Grain size descriptions for each sampled interval follow those defined by Blott and Pye57, and include a mean (average grain size), mode (dominant grain size), s.d. (degree of sorting) and percentage of clay, silt and sand. We show the depths of coarse pulses and fining upwards sequences in Fig. 5.

Foraminiferal and cave chalk analysis
We examined 42 samples from Units 1–12 for foraminiferal taxa (Supplementary Table 8) and taphonomy (surface condition of foraminiferal tests). Foraminiferal taxonomy constrains provenance through ecology, and taphonomy can determine residence time and transport history. For foraminifera and cave chalk analysis, we subsampled 5 cm3 samples from each layer, wet-sieved them at >63 μm, dried at 25 °C and examined them under a binocular microscope. Sieved samples were dry split to obtain counts of ∼300 foraminifera per sample58. For each sample, the total number of foraminifera present in 5 cm3 (total concentration) was calculated, as was the percentage of each species present (abundance). Foraminiferal taxonomy followed Loeblich and Tappan59. Foraminifera were further categorized according to the taphonomic (surface) condition of the tests as defined by Pilarczyk and Reinhardt51, where pristine individuals are those that are taphonomically unaltered; abraded individuals are those that are edge rounded and corroded; and fragmented individuals are those that are broken with angular edges (Supplementary Fig. 3). In each sample, we documented the presence or absence of cave chalk. Where present, we categorized the surface condition of individual cave chalk fragments as either pristine or weathered. Pristine fragments are small, fragile and have a delicate floret structure; weathered fragments are larger and more rounded, with no floret structure.

Abstract
Sustaining an accurate, timely, and global tsunami forecast system remains a challenge for scientific communities. To this end, various viable geophysical monitoring devices have been deployed. However, it is difficult to implement new observation networks in other regions and maintaining the existing systems is costly. This study proposes a new and complementary approach to monitoring the tsunami using existing moving platforms. The proposed system consists of a radar altimeter, Global Navigation Satellite Systems receiver, and an adequate communication link on airborne platforms such as commercial airplanes, drones, or dedicated high-speed aircraft, and a data assimilation module with a deterministic model. We demonstrated, through twin-data experiment, the feasibility of the proposed system in forecasting tsunami at the Nankai Trough of Japan. Our results demonstrated the potential of an airborne tsunami observation as a viable future technology through proxy observations and rigorous numerical experiments. The wide coverage of the tsunamigenic regions without a new observation network is an advantage while various regulatory constraints need to be overcome. This study offered a novel perspective on the developments in tsunami detection and forecasting technology. Such multi-purpose observation using existing platforms provides a promising and practical solution in establishing sustainable observational networks.

Introduction
Early detection of tsunamis in the open ocean is one of the crucial factors for tsunami forecasting, and hence tsunami observing systems have been mainly deployed in the deep waters. There are several established systems that are currently operating: the Deep-ocean Assessment and Reporting of Tsunamis (DART)1, the Japanese cabled ocean bottom pressure systems including the Dense Oceanfloor Network System for Earthquakes and Tsunamis (DONET)2 and S-Net3, and the Canadian North–East Pacific Time-series Underwater Networked Experiments (NEPTUNE-Canada)4. In addition to the bottom pressure systems, some surface measurements based on Global Positioning System (GPS) buoys are also available along the coasts of Japan5. These existing systems have detected numerous tsunamis and their viabilities are proven. However, these devices are attached to conventional platforms at fixed locations and their sustainability is a concern. One alternative is the utilization of satellite altimetry data to detect a tsunami6,7, but the sparseness limits their capability. A more advanced space-borne observation using a global navigation satellite system reflectometry can be a prospective offshore tsunami detector8. However, satellites are costly and less expensive system utilizing existing platforms is desired. Recently, several studies suggested the use of spontaneous/moving observations by a ship height positioning to detect tsunamis9,10. What is intriguing is that such a system offers a unique and most likely wider coverage than the conventional observing systems.

An essential component of a fully functioning tsunami forecasting system is the data assimilation. The tsunami waveform inversion, which is the most common tsunami forecasting method, utilizes the pre-calculated Green’s functions to estimate the initial values of the numerical model. Tsushima et al.11 developed the so-called tFISH/RAPiD (tsunami Forecasting based on Inversion for initial sea-Surface Height/Real-time Automatic detection method for Permanent Displacement), which has been integrated to the Japan Meteorological Agency tsunami forecasting system. Another application of the tsunami waveform inversion is the Short-term Inundation Forecast for Tsunamis (SIFT) implemented at the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration Tsunami Warning Centers12. More recently, a sequential tsunami data assimilation method based on optimal interpolation has been proposed13 and was applied to several events14,15,16. The variant of this scheme, which is suitable for spontaneous observations such as sea surface measurement by ship height records, was developed combining the Green’s function-based initialization17. However, considerable improvement is still needed to efficiently cope with high-speed moving platforms such as airborne observations.

Our previous study18 demonstrated the successful observation of sea surface heights (SSH) across the Kuroshio current as a proxy data with a sufficient level of error for the detection of large tsunamis. Accordingly, here we propose a new approach to monitoring the tsunami based on the same instrumentation of radar altimeter and global navigation satellite systems (GNSS) receiver installed on either commercial airplanes (CAs), drones, or dedicated high-speed aircrafts (HAs). The procedure is, in principle, similar to that using space-borne observations by satellite altimetry. But, the average relative speed of airplanes is much slower than satellites, enabling us to observe the tsunami for a longer duration to be adequately assimilated into the numerical model. We develop an efficient data assimilation procedure for moving observations, extending the optimal interpolation scheme developed for fixed observation points13,14,15,16,17. For fast-moving observation points, the error covariance matrix needs to be updated at each assimilation sequence which requires considerable computational time. To minimize the computational time, the dimension was substantially reduced by means of low-pass filtering the spectrum of the error covariance matrix.

Results
To assess the proposed approach, we utilize the result of a numerical simulation of the potential future Nankai Trough tsunami generated by a hypothetical M8.7 earthquake obtained from the Central Disaster Management Council (CDMC), Japan19 (Fig. 1a–d). The CDMC source represents a plausible key feature of future events based on the seismotectonic settings of the region and it had been widely used in the corresponding studies e.g.10,17. Additionally, we also store the associated maximum coastal tsunami heights for validation purposes (Fig. 1e). For a concise presentation, the figures show only 20-min simulation results, albeit the actual simulation time is 60 min. We also store the spatiotemporal variations of simulated tsunami elevations along assumed airplane tracks and add real noise obtained from our observations18 to imitate the actually observed tsunami in the real event. Assuming that the tsunami signal together with flight tracking data is available in real-time, we can then perform the proposed tsunami data assimilation to make rapid tsunami forecasts. An initial guess of the background state is roughly estimated using the tsunami source by an inversion analysis from existing tsunami observing systems in the region17 (t = 0 in Fig. 2a,b). Details about the experimental setup are described in Supplementary #1 and illustrated in Fig. S1. We use statistical measures K and κ based on Aida20 with the suggested criteria by Shuto21 to validate our results (see Supplementary #1).

Figure 1
figure1
(a) Initial CAs distribution based on flight tracking data on 15 November 2016, 05:00 UTC (www.flightradar24.com). Contour lines indicate sea surface displacements of a hypothetical tsunami source generated by an earthquake of M8.7 (obtained from the CDMC report19), or the true state at t = 0 min. (b–d) The true state of tsunami elevations at 5, 10, and 20 min. (e) Maximum coastal tsunami heights along the longitudinal axis associated with the source obtained after 60-min simulation. Image in (a) is obtained from https://www.flightradar24.com/ (data: Google Maps, 2016, flightradar24) overlaid with contour generated using MATLAB 2016b. Maps in (b–d) are produced by authors based on GEBCO_08 Grid data (https://www.gebco.net/), using MATLAB 2016b.

Full size image
Figure 2
figure2
Assimilated tsunami elevations with 10-min assimilation period and 60-min simulation time. The initial condition (at t = 0) is obtained from the inversion analysis. (a) Using 65 CAs with a uniform speed of 200 m/s. (b) Using 7 HAs with a uniform speed of 500 m/s. Red dots indicate the selected airports: Miyazaki (KMI), Oita (OIT), Kochi (KCZ), Tokushima (TKS), Shirahama (SHM), Chubu (NGO), and Shizuoka (FSZ). Maps in (a,b) are produced by authors based on GEBCO_08 Grid data (https://www.gebco.net/), using MATLAB 2016b.

Full size image
Commercial airplanes
Real-time flight tracking data together with other flight information for CAs are presently available using a surveillance technique based on an automatic dependent surveillance-broadcast (ADS-B)22,23. There are several global flight tracking services derived from the ADS-B that can be accessed online, e.g., FlightAware, Flightradar24, and Plane Finder. In this study, we use a snapshot of CAs distribution on 15 November 2016 (05:00 UTC) obtained from www.flightradar24.com (Fig. 1a). The virtually observed tsunami are generated under the assumption that the earthquake-induced tsunami occurs at time t = 0 when the initial airplane distribution is extracted from the Flightradar24. Then, the flight tracks are extended along straight lines from the initial heading directions at a uniform speed of 200 m/s (the average speed of passenger airplanes is ranging from ~200–250 m/s).

Figure 2a illustrates the data assimilation process using 65 CAs. Without assimilating the SSH observed by the CAs, the forecast of maximum coastal tsunami heights results in K = 1.50, and κ = 1.60, and accuracy of 66.8% (Fig. 3a), which can also be considered as the forecast performance by the nonoptimal source estimate. The shortage of this forecast is mainly attributed to the limited inversion period to account for the near-field source being considered (we use a 10-min window so that it is consistent with the assimilation period) and the lack of spatial coverage of observation points used to infer the tsunami source17. With the assimilation of SSH observed by the CAs, the tsunami wavefield originating from the less accurate initial tsunami source estimation is gradually corrected, leading to a considerable improvement of forecast performance (K = 1.15, κ = 1.34, accuracy = 86.7%) (Fig. 3b). Given the limited time and data, especially in near-field events, the accuracy of real-time tsunami source estimates is usually poor24,25. Our experiment shows that within the same time frame, additional data can efficiently be incorporated in the forward modeling stage to improve the forecasts.

Figure 3
figure3
Comparison of true and forecasted maximum coastal tsunami heights obtained after 60-min simulation. Formulation of the statistical measures of K, κ, and accuracy are presented in Supplementary #1. Note that for a concise presentation, K and κ values are rounded to two decimal places, but the accuracy is calculated based on the original values without rounding. (a) Without assimilation. (b) Assimilation result using 65 CAs associated with Fig. 2a. (c) Assimilation result using 7 HAs associated with Fig. 2b.

Full size image
In the real case, however, the result is dependent upon the availability of airplanes. In Fig. S3 (Supplementary #2), we plot the CA distribution around the study area for six consecutive days at the same hour (05:00 UTC) including the one used in Fig. 2a. During the day, the distribution of CAs (on average of 50 to 60 airplanes) is sufficient to obtain a satisfactory result as indicated by the previous experiment. However, one should expect fewer airplanes in the night time. Figure S4 shows variations of CA distribution throughout Japan on the same day at 4-hour intervals. We use more recent data from the flightradar24 on 25 July 2018. To assess the forecast performance when a limited number of airplanes exist in the study area, we use the distribution of 8 CAs at 16:00 (UTC). The results are plotted in Fig. S5, which show that the forecast accuracy is below the satisfactory criteria21, but still better than the initial forecast depicted in Fig. 3a.

High-speed aircrafts
In this experiment, we assume that specifically dedicated HAs for tsunami observations are available at any time each at seven airports around the study area (see Fig. 2b), and are scrambled immediately after the earthquake toward offshore. The HA can be either common military aircraft or high-speed unmanned aerial vehicles (UAV)26,27. The use of HA can provide flexibility in achieving the desired speed and route. Therefore, the optimal speed of 500 m/s suggested by the experimental result shown in Fig. 4a, can easily be implemented here. The forecast performance by assimilating SSH observed using 7 HAs (Fig. 2b) yields an accuracy of 76.6%, K = 1.31, κ = 1.58 (see Fig. 3c), which is substantially smaller than the case of 65 CAs that yielded 86.7%. However, this is comparable to the 8 CA case shown in Fig. S5, and highlights the advantage of HA. While the 8 CAs immediately record the tsunami at their offshore initial locations, the 7 HAs require additional time before starting the detection. Therefore, a faster speed is necessary not only to ensure sufficient spatial coverage controlling the forecast accuracy but also to compensate for the unfavorable initial observation locations. It is evident from this experiment that with the optimal speed and a certain initial distribution, HAs can still produce a reasonable level of accuracy with a much less number of observations compared to the 65 CAs.

Figure 4
figure4
(a) Variation of forecast accuracies by 7 HAs with different speeds. (b) Computing times and accuracies by different number of CAs.

Full size image
As an alternative to the high-speed UAVs, we also conduct an additional scenario considering a common drone system with a much slower speed than the tsunami celerity28. Thus, the observation resembles the fixed/non-moving observation platforms. This experiment can also be used to assess the performance of moving versus non-moving observations in tsunami forecasting. Therefore, we utilize an identical number and distribution of the drones to the CAs shown in Fig. 1a. As shown in Fig. S6 (Supplementary #2), the forecast using 65 non-moving observations results in an accuracy of 83.9%, K = 1.19, κ = 1.36, which is less accurate compared to the moving observations (Fig. 3b). This clearly indicates the advantage of moving over non-moving observations. The result reconfirms the importance of the azimuthal coverage of observations in tsunami forecasting, which in this scenario is better represented by the moving than the non-moving observations. We also conduct further analyses on the effect of the number of observations to the forecast skill, which will be discussed in a later section.

Effect of aircraft speed
The same initial aircraft distribution with various speeds results in a different level of forecast accuracy. For simplification, we assess here the influence of speed of 7 HAs (Fig. 2b) in a more general manner, thus K and κ values are omitted in the discussion. As depicted in Fig. 4a, the optimal speed to obtain the best accuracy of 76.6% is approximately 500 m/s, beyond which speed the forecast accuracy gradually decreases falling down below 70% for a speed exceeding 5000 m/s. It should be noted that the curve is based on 10-s sampling intervals (assimilation cycle). Different rates of sampling would produce different curves. In general, however, slower speeds provide more temporal than spatial information and vice versa, leading to an adverse impact on the forecasts; whereas a balanced manner can be achieved by the optimal speed due to the favorable distribution of the observation points. This is in line with our previous study29, concluding that observation points should be spread sufficiently wide enough to capture large-scale modes of the tsunami at which the main energy exists because a proper quantification of tsunami energy plays a critical role in tsunami forecasting30. The experiment also implies that extremely fast-moving platforms such as satellites (e.g., the Jason satellite orbital speed: ~7200 m/s, ground speed: ~5800 m/s) are probably not optimal. Moreover, the infrequent satellite pass-over time can be another disadvantage as well.

Optimal number of observations and data assimilation
To determine the optimal number of observations and simultaneously asses the performance of the data assimilation procedure, we use the speed of 200 m/s similar to the CA case. We arbitrarily change the number and initial position of CAs and estimate the corresponding errors and computing times. We gradually increase the number of airplanes from 40 to 200 with an increment of 40 and plot the resulting accuracies and computing times in Fig. 4b. Additionally, the figure shows comparisons between the proposed tsunami data assimilation using a reduced rank optimal interpolation (RROI) with the standard method by an optimal interpolation (OI)13. Regardless of the data assimilation method, with 40 CAs, the K and κ fall beyond the suggested range21. This indicates that with the prescribed speed, more than 40 CAs are required to obtain the expected result. However, such an optimal number of observations by airplanes is dependent on their distribution. A relatively less number of airplanes with a better spatial distribution may produce better forecasts than more airplanes, but lacking in coverage. In terms of model performance, it is evident that the RROI can maintain a relatively short computing time, particularly for a large number of observations, compared to the OI without significantly compromising accuracy. Therefore, the RROI can efficiently cope with the moving observations, and thus meet the main requirement of a real-time tsunami forecasting.

Discussion
Our numerical experiments suggest that the utilization of CAs as platforms for radar observations can be a promising tool for offshore large tsunami detections. However, there are still a few challenges that should be addressed in the actual implementation of the proposed approach. First is related to the technical aspect, particularly the real-time data transmission to the ground server. While the speed and bandwidth of inflight internet connections are currently limited18, the ADS-B system automatically broadcasts, about twice per second, information on the aircraft identification, position, altitude, speed, and other parameters obtained from onboard equipment (e.g., GNSS receiver), which can be retrieved by the ADS-B receivers installed on either terrestrial stations or on satellites22. For our purpose, new communication protocols or additional bandwidth to include the processed SSH data are required. Another issue that may arise is regarding cooperation with the airlines, which can be accomplished by either voluntary participation or enforced regulations by the authority. A good example is the Comprehensive Observation Network for TRace gases by AIrLiner (CONTRAIL) project31, in which commercial airlines provide an observational platform for obtaining free tropospheric CO2 worldwide32.

The non-technical difficulty in relation to the regulatory requirements may partly be overcome by employing HAs, commonly owned by the air force in most countries. In our study, we note that the airports indicated in Fig. 2b are selected merely to facilitate the numerical setup, such that the time required for the HAs to start detecting the tsunami is minimum as we choose only nearshore airports. In reality, some airports may not be suited for military aircraft and appropriate response time should also be taken into account. Nonetheless, this experiment shows that the limited number of platforms but with optimal speed and coverage can still be useful to enhance the forecast skill. We also demonstrate the efficacy of low-speed UAVs assuming that continuous tsunami monitoring is available. Considering that the total weight and dimension of the required devices (GNSS receiver, radar altimeter33, and ADS-B transponder) are relatively small (https://www.garmin.com, accessed Dec. 2019), it is practically possible to install it on small-sized aircraft.

In this study, the success of the tsunami data assimilation is to some extent attributed to the estimate of tsunami source considered as the initial guess for the background state. The source was inferred from the virtually observed tsunami at the DONET system and GPS buoys17. However, similar estimates can be difficult to obtain at regions with a limited number of tsunami observation stations. To resolve this issue, Sheehan et al.15 proposed the use of a rapid W-phase earthquake solution to initiate the tsunami data assimilation. The approach is feasible as seismic instrumentations are more globally available than that of the tsunami. The tsunami source can also be estimated from onshore GNSS data in real-time11. Initially, the tsunami data assimilation was developed to produce tsunami forecasts without the need to account for the tsunami source13 that is often accompanied by a higher degree of uncertainty34. However, the lack of spatial density of observation points greatly degrades the forecast performance of the method35. Similarly, in our study, the distance between observation platforms can be very far at a certain instant in time. Therefore, the initial guess is necessary to minimize artificial shocks caused by the data assimilation procedure normally appeared in the early stages36. The combined or individual use of seismic, geodetic, and tsunami data should be considered in the tsunami source estimation to ensure the universality of the method.

Similar to the ship height observations9,10, a unique and important feature of the proposed observational scheme lies in the utilization of existing platforms that are expected to provide more sustainable observations in the future as the number of CAs are continuously growing over time. Furthermore, it may also lead to a relatively cost-effective observation as the required devices are available in the present avionic system. However, we note that necessary customizations are needed and the proposed system is likely subjected to several obstacles during the actual operation. The airborne observations regardless of the platforms are prone to extreme weather conditions, and the operation of commercial drones should comply with the local regulations mainly for safety purposes. Furthermore, the terrestrial ADS-B receiver can also be interfered with or damaged by the preceding earthquake. Nevertheless, combined with the existing tsunami observing systems, we would enhance the tsunami warning capability.

Millions of people around the world and US$ billions in assets are exposed to the global tsunami hazard37. Such a problem requires a comprehensive solution, in which tsunami monitoring and forecasting play an important role; hence, exploring innovative ways is of necessity. A recent initiative utilizing undersea telecommunication cables for global ocean observations called Science Monitoring And Reliable Telecommunications (SMART) has been introduced38. Howe et al.38 demonstrated the effectiveness of the SMART system using hypothetical cable routes to improve the warning system of the Pacific Tsunami Warning Center for a far-field event. Our study is focused on a near field application, although the results may not fully address the issue of timeliness particularly at the shorelines adjacent to the source region, for the tsunami may arrive earlier than 10 min. In this case, one solution is to raise community awareness, as noted by Kânoğlu et al.39 and Okal40, in which statistics from several recent tsunami events suggested that self-evacuation by educated population, presently remains the most effective way for the near field tsunami mitigation. Apart from the near field and local application to Japan, the study can be seminal to broader implications. With the vast coverage of unconventional platforms such as CAs, the new system can also lead to global tsunami monitoring. Although the developments of tsunami observing system introduced in this study are still in its infancy, it could potentially be a viable future technology, not only limited to natural disaster-related applications. A global monitoring of sea surface states will also be valuable to other variety of marine operations (e.g., fisheries, coastal development planning, marine renewable energy, etc.). Since the system is mutually beneficial to both disaster and commercial aspects, similar to the SMART project, the joint use of the data may be capitalized to ease the financial burden concerning the operational costs. Lastly, the rapid advancements of aviation, observation, and information technology, as well as the supporting legislation, are of importance to expedite the realization of the proposed approach.

Method
Data acquisition
We have conducted airborne measurements of SSH using an airplane equipped with a nadir-pointing frequency-modulated continuous wave radar and a GNSS receiver. In the real implementation, however, an additional device is required for real-time data transmissions that are either ADS-B transponder or onboard modem. The SSH can be obtained by subtracting the distance between the airplane and ocean surface measured by the radar from the absolute altitude of the airplane relative to a reference of Earth ellipsoid retrieved by the GNSS positioning method. The summary of the observation procedure is presented in Supplementary #1 and Fig. S2. While details about the data processing, observation parameters, radar specifications, as well as more results of field observations can be found in Hirobe et al.18. Figure 5 shows examples of the result of the radar observations conducted on 29 June 2016. We validate the results via a comparison with the Jason-2 SSH. Since the accuracy of the Jason-2 SSH is very high (<3.5 cm)41, we assume that the noise level of our measurements is simply equivalent to the residual between the observed SSH and the Jason-2 SSH. The noise characterization result with an estimated observation error of ~10 cm is then incorporated into the data assimilation procedure. A sample of virtually observed tsunami elevation used in the data assimilation is shown in Fig. S7.

Figure 5
figure5
SSH measurements on 29 June 2016. (a) Alouette Technology Synthetic Aperture Radar (ATSAR) hardware installed on an airplane. (b) Airplane tracks overlaid by the Jason-2 track. (c) Comparison of SSH observed by the ATSAR and Jason-2. Time annotation is based on the global time zone (UTC). Images in (a) were taken by authors and available from http://www.altek.jp/. Maps in (b) are produced by authors based on GEBCO_08 Grid data (https://www.gebco.net/), using MATLAB 2016b.

Full size image
Figure 5c depicts the variation of SSH along the airplane tracks (Fig. 5b) after removal of the tide and the equipotential surface of the Earth’s gravity field known as the geoid. The curve and approximately 1 m SSH difference at both ends of the track are associated with the Kuroshio current. Such an SSH variation exhibits almost a similar spatial scale to large tsunamis typically generated in the megathrust region such as our study area, the Nankai Trough of Japan. Therefore, it is reasonable to regard the Kuroshio current as a proxy for the tsunami. Although in the actual application, it is necessary to isolate the tsunami signal from other oceanic phenomena including the Kuroshio current, mesoscale eddies, and tide to facilitate the tsunami forecasting algorithms. This tsunami extraction feature should be incorporated in the radar data processing stages18.

Tsunami data assimilation
The standard tsunami data assimilation procedure is based on a sequential OI13. The gain matrix in the OI is assumed to be constant because it depends only on observations-to-grids and observations-to-observations distances expressed by a Gaussian kernel (we use an e-folding scale of 23 km). This assumption significantly simplifies the computation, which is crucial for tsunami forecasting purposes. Despite such a rough assumption, previous studies14,15,16 proved that the method is sufficient for a transient process such as tsunamis using real case data. However, for moving observation platforms, the assumption is no longer valid since the relative distances from observation points to both other observation points and the grids would change with time. Consequently, the gain matrix must be computed at each assimilation cycle, which inevitably increases the computing time, particularly when a considerable number of observations are taken into account. We, therefore, apply a rank reduction for the background error covariance matrix called the RROI. Similar rank reduction in various data assimilation schemes has previously been introduced e.g.42,43,44.

Following the rank reduction approach in Song & Lim44, the n×n background error covariance B, where n is the number of numerical model grids, can be decomposed into orthonormal eigenvectors ej with the corresponding eigenvalues λj, that is

B=∑j=1nλjejeTj.
(1)
The B matrix does not depend on measurements, so it can be computed and decomposed in advance, and stored. We then select only r leading components of the eigenvalues and eigenvectors based on a trial-and-error approach. Figure S8 shows that the curve of model error remains relatively flat at >70 eigenmodes (r). With the same level of error, the computing time escalates to more than 0.5 min when r > 110. Therefore, we use r = 110 (≪n), signifying the reduced-rank approach. From this decomposition, we can construct an r×r diagonal matrix D,

D=[λ1⋮0⋯⋱⋯0⋮λr],
(2)
and an n×r leading eigenvector matrix E,

E=[e1e2…er].
(3)
The n background state vector xbcan be represented using a reduced rank approximation by transforming it into r-dimensional state vector xbl as,

xbl=ETxb,
(4)
while the trailing eigenmodes for the background state is formulated as,

xbt=xb−Exbl.
(5)
If the number of observations is p, the r×p gain matrix in the reduced rank expression can be written as,

Wl=(D−1+[HE]TR−1HE)−1(HE)TR−1,
(6)
where H is the observational operator matrix (p×n) and R is the error covariance matrix of the observations (p×p). We assume that R is a diagonal matrix, in which its diagonal component consists of normalized observation error variances (ρ)45. In this study, we set ρ = 0.9 reflecting the noise level in the real observation. The r-dimensional reduced rank analysis state vector is then written as,

xal=xbl+Wl(y−Hlxbl),
(7)
where the observation operator Hlxbl=H(Exbl+xbt) and y is a vector of observed tsunami elevations with a dimension of p. The following equation is then used to transform the reduced rank analysis state into a full rank n-dimensional space,

xa=Exal+xbt.
(8)
In this sequential assimilation, the background state vector at the i-th time step is updated by integrating the shallow water equations46 using the analysis state vector at the previous time step (i-1), i.e. xbi≡Fxai−1. The bathymetry data are based on the GEBCO_08 Grid (30 arc sec). We set the assimilation cycle at every 10 s, the forward model time step of 1 s, and 10-min assimilation window of 60-min simulation time. Note that we only use tsunami elevation data for the assimilation, regarding the velocity components as unobserved variables. We apply a simplified cross-covariance to statistically spread the information from observations among variables and an initial guess for the background state similar to Mulia et al.17.

Abstract
Information on palaeo-tsunami magnitude is scientifically and socially essential to mitigate tsunami risk. However, estimating palaeo-tsunami parameters (e.g., inundation distance) from sediments is not simple because tsunami deposits reflect complex transport processes. Here, we show a new approach to estimate tsunami inundation distance based on the mixture ratio of gravels from several sources in tsunami deposits. We measured the roundness of source gravels in modern beach and fluvial deposits in a coastal valley in Japan through image analysis and then calculated the mixture ratio of both sediment types in tsunami deposits. Normalising the mixture ratios by inundation distances revealed an abrupt change in the mixture ratio at a constant percentile, regardless of tsunami magnitude. This relation allowed estimation of the inundation distance of palaeo-tsunamis during the last 4000 years.

Introduction
Tsunamis are one of the most devastating natural hazards on Earth, triggered by earthquakes, submarine or onshore landslides, volcanic eruptions and meteorites. Thus, knowledge of palaeo-tsunami parameters (e.g., inundation distance, run-up height, and flow speed) is critical for disaster prevention and city planning along coastal regions. However, not only observed and documented historical records but also geological records must be used to understand low-frequency large tsunamis because recurrence intervals of tsunamigenic great earthquakes in subduction zones range from 102–103 years1,2,3,4,5. In particular, the AD 2004 Sumatra-Andaman earthquake (Indian Ocean tsunami) and the AD 2011 Tohoku-oki earthquake (Tohoku-oki tsunami) provided data as modern analogues of tsunamis triggered by earthquakes, and palaeo-tsunami research progressed and raised new problems6,7. For palaeo-tsunami parameters, inundation distance and area and run-up height can be estimated by palaeo-tsunami deposit distribution with palaeo-coastline reconstruction8,9,10, and flow speed can be reconstructed using numerical modelling11,12,13.

In this study, we estimated the palaeo-tsunami inundation distance (ID), which is an important parameter for quantifying the magnitude of a tsunami, using typical tsunami deposits from a small coastal valley in Japan.

We used Wadell’s definition of roundness14 (hereafter simply “roundness”)—a widely used shape-descriptive parameter—to characterise clasts within tsunami deposits by means of image analysis. This roundness, which is quite different from other shape parameters such as aspect ratio and circularity15, is calculated using radii of curvature for each corner and the maximum inscribed circle. Image analysis allows roundness data to be obtained on the order of 104, two orders of magnitude greater than that obtained by conventional methods16,17, such as hand measurement and visual classification18. This result is a great improvement because it is difficult to perform detailed statistical analysis due to lack of roundness data from conventional methods. The large datasets of unique and sensitive roundness enable distinguishing beach and fluvial grains statistically. Assuming that the roundness distribution of tsunami deposits reflects the roundness distributions in source materials (beach and fluvial deposits), we calculated the mixture ratio of the source materials of the tsunami deposits. Consequently, we determined the relationship between the mixture ratio of historical tsunami deposits and normalised distances from the coastline by their observed IDs. Furthermore, we discovered that the mixture ratios show abrupt changes at a constant percentile in normalised distance, regardless of tsunami magnitude. Using this finding, we estimate unknown IDs of palaeo-tsunamis.

Setting
The study site, Koyadori, where the AD 2011 Tohoku-oki tsunami ran up to approximately 30 m above sea level19,20, is a V-shaped, narrow coastal valley on the Sanriku Coast (Fig. 1B). Volcanic and pyroclastic rocks crop out on the west side of the Koyadori valley, and plutonic rocks crop out on the opposite side (Fig. 1A). However, the beach sediments are mainly composed of very coarse sand to pebbly gravel originating from volcanic and pyroclastic rocks21 (see Supplementary Fig. S1) because plutonic rocks are easily reduced to small sand size clasts and transported to offshore areas. In contrast, fluvial sediments comprise talus and alluvial fans (Fig. 1B) and are distributed narrowly on the riverbed and widely on the surfaces of the talus and alluvial fans.

Figure 1
figure1
Location, geological setting, and topography of the study site. (A) Geology of the area around Koyadori, Iwate Prefecture, Japan34. EU: Eurasian Plate. PA: Pacific Plate. PHS: Philippine Sea Plate. SC: Sanriku Coast. The star indicates the epicentre of the 2011 Tohoku-oki earthquake. (B) Geomorphological map21. The contour map is based on the 1-m mesh digital elevation model supplied by Iwate Prefecture. The contour interval is 5 m. (C) A–A’ profile based on the 1-m mesh digital elevation model. The dates and arrows denote historical tsunami event ages and maximum run-up heights. *According to local tradition, the AD 1611 tsunami passed the watershed (at approximately 30 m above sea level) between Koyadori and Oura35. (A,B) are shared under a CCBY 4.0 open access licence (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/) and changes were made to the original figure.

Full size image
As for palaeo-topography, the present topographic setting (depression between beach ridge and talus/alluvial fan) was already established in ca. 6000 cal yr BP based on a drilling survey and interbedded tephra age21. No marine deposits were interbedded within drilled core sediments in the Koyadori valley after 6000 cal yr BP. Additionally, the long-term subsidence rate using Holocene intertidal deposits in Miyako, approximately 20 km north of Koyadori, is less than 1.1–1.9 mm/yr22. These results indicate that the palaeo-coastline since ca. 6000 cal yr BP was in the same position as at present or more seaward.

The Tohoku-oki tsunami struck the Pacific coast of northeast Japan. Particularly high run-up heights were recorded along the Sanriku Coast23 (Fig. 1A). Historical records of tsunamis in this region are available for the last 400 years, and the run-up heights of historical tsunamis at Koyadori were estimated and measured (Table 1). Eleven modern and palaeo-tsunami deposits (E1 to E11, from youngest to oldest) that formed during the last 4000 years were previously identified at the Koyadori trench (12 m long, 3 m wide, and 2 m deep) excavated in a small lowland area of the valley (Fig. 1B) and dated by radiocarbon dating and tephrochronology21,24 (see Supplementary Table S1). The historical events corresponding to the E1, E2, and E3 tsunami deposits represent the AD2011 Tohoku-oki tsunami, the AD1896 Meiji Sanriku tsunami, and the AD1611 Keicho tsunami, respectively21,24.

Table 1 Information on historical tsunamis at Koyadori.
Full size table
Roundness measurements and mixture ratios
We first measured the roundness values of gravel particles in beach sediments and in fluvial sediments at two locations (the east and west rivers) for comparison with tsunami deposits. On 19–20 July 2017, we sampled from two beach sites (B1 and B2) and six tributary sites (WR1–WR3 and ER1–ER3) where the AD 2011 Tohoku-oki tsunami did not inundate (Fig. 1B). The roundness values showed clear differences (Fig. 2E–G): the gravel particles of the beach sediments were rounded, reflecting abrasion by sea waves, and those of the fluvial sediments were angular. The roundness distribution of the E1 tsunami deposits (Fig. 2H) can be interpreted as a mixture of these source materials because there are at least two modes in the roundness distribution, and these modes correspond to the modes of fluvial and beach sediments (Fig. 2E–G). We therefore assumed that the studied tsunami deposits are composed of beach and fluvial materials and calculated the mixture ratios of these materials.

Figure 2
figure2
Photographs and roundness distributions of gravel particles in source materials and AD 2011 tsunami deposits (E1 tsunami deposits). (A–D) Photographs of samples. (E–H) The histograms show the roundness distributions of the beach, river and AD 2011 tsunami deposits (E1 tsunami deposits). To obtain the roundness distributions, we used only particles 2–8 mm in diameter. N = number of particles. The scale bars in the photographs are 1 cm.

Full size image
We subsequently analysed 164 tsunami deposit samples taken from 56 sites, including the trench site, drilling sites and outcrop sites along a line orthogonal to the coast (Fig. 1B). In the E1–E3 tsunami deposits, for which the IDs are already known19,25,26,27, we found different trends of mixture ratio changes in the deposits from seaside to inland (Fig. 3). Gravels of the E2 tsunami deposits, which have a short ID, were associated with a high fluvial deposit content at the trench site 338 m inland. In contrast, gravels of the E1 and E3 tsunami deposits, which have long IDs (>1000 m), showed a low fluvial content at the trench site 338 m inland, but the fluvial content of the E1 tsunami deposits increased to more than 50% at a distance 665 m from the coastline.

Figure 3
figure3
Changes in the roundness distribution of tsunami deposits E1 to E4 with distance from the coast. The numbers to the left of the histograms show the sample site distances from the coastline, in bins of 20 or 30 m (except at the top two rows). N = number of particles. The original data are provided in Supplementary Table S3.

Full size image
We consider this increase in fluvially sourced gravels with inland distance to reflect tsunami transport processes. At the shore, run-up waves would mainly erode and transport beach sediments, resulting in high beach gravel contents in seaside tsunami deposits. In contrast, return waves would mainly erode and transport fluvial sediments (river, talus, and fan deposits), thereby resulting in high fluvial gravel contents in inland tsunami deposits. This relation indicates a correlation between changes in the mixture ratio away from the coast and tsunami sediment transport.

Distances of the E1–E3 tsunami deposit sample locations from the coast were normalised by each event’s ID (Fig. 4A), and abrupt changes in the mixture ratio were identified at the same percentile for the E1–E3 events. These steps mean that the distribution pattern of the composition of source materials in tsunami deposits from the coast to each inundation limit is consistent, regardless of the tsunami magnitudes. We call this point the tsunami gravel inflection point (TGIP), where the fluvial sediment ratio markedly changes from less than 25% to more than 40% (Fig. 4A). That is, the TGIP represents the balance point of sediment transport of gravels between the run-up and return waves of tsunamis. As illustrated schematically in Fig. 5, when the ID, which reflects the tsunami magnitude, changes, the TGIP moves landward or coastward in response.

Figure 4
figure4
Ratios of fluvial sediments in tsunami deposits. (A) Relationship between the mixture ratios of beach and fluvial sources in tsunami deposits and normalised distance from the coastline. The distances of the E1 to E3 tsunami deposits from the coastline are normalised by their IDs, which are provided in Table 1. For the E4 tsunami deposit, we plotted data assuming that the ID was 675 m. (B) Mixture ratio of fluvial sediments in tsunami deposits (E1 to E11) at the trench site. Original data are provided in Supplementary Table S4. The right label indicates the estimated IDs assuming that the palaeo-coastline was in the same position as at present.

Full size image
Figure 5
figure5
Schematic illustration showing the relationship between tsunami size and the transport of gravel particles. Schematic profiles showing the transport process of tsunami deposits for a large (A) and a small (B) tsunami. The arrows and arrow sizes in the bird’s eye view maps indicate the flow directions and relative flow speeds, respectively.

Full size image
IDs of palaeo-tsunamis during the last 4000 years
Based on the above relationship, we could use the mixture ratios of palaeo-tsunami deposits obtained not only at multiple sites but also at one site to estimate the TGIPs associated with palaeo-tsunamis. First, using the distribution of mixture ratios of the E4 tsunami deposits (970–1290 cal yr BP24), we estimated the E4 TGIP and ID as approximately 280 m and 700 m from the coastline, respectively (Fig. 4A). Considering palaeo-topography and long-term crustal movement22, we assumed that the ca. 1000 cal yr BP palaeo-coastline was almost the same as the present coastline. Therefore, the estimated E4 ID (700 m) corresponds to a 10-m run-up height. We thus deduced that the palaeo-tsunami responsible for the E4 tsunami deposits was similar to or smaller than the AD 1896 Meiji Sanriku tsunami that is correlated with the E2 tsunami deposits. Next, we estimated the relative TGIP locations of the E5 to E11 tsunami deposits at the trench site (see Supplementary Fig. S2). The TGIPs of E5–E7 and E11 tsunami deposits were estimated to be near the trench site, whereas those of the E8–E10 tsunami deposits were deduced to be on the seaward side of the trench because their proportions of fluvial sediments significantly exceeded 25% (Fig. 4B). We could estimate the relative TGIP locations of E5 to E11 tsunami deposits for the trench site. However, precise palaeo-coastline restoration is required to estimate robust IDs and inundation heights.

The parameters (e.g., inundation height and distance) required to describe the actual tsunami size reflect not only tsunami magnitude but also various local factors, such as topography, air pressure, tides, and vegetation; i.e., these parameters are complex. Our new approach allows us to estimate ID directly using a spatially continuous roundness distribution. Moreover, data from only one site provide the opportunity to constrain the tsunami magnitude using the deduced TGIP position. By using the ID and TGIP estimated by our method, it is possible to estimate palaeo-tsunami run-up height and/or inundation area, allowing establishment or revision of tsunami generation models and tsunami risk assessments.

Conclusions
The main finding of this study is that the mixture ratios of the source materials in tsunami deposits abruptly change at the same inundation distance percentile, regardless of the tsunami magnitude. This fact provides the novel possibility that inundation distance can be estimated directly from tsunami deposits at any other beach with sand and gravel, which occupy 31% of the ice-free coast on Earth28. That is, although the “tsunami gravel inflection point” would be variable by site due to local topography, this site-specific TGIP allows us to estimate an absolute palaeo-tsunami inundation distance from tsunami deposits. Moreover, we may be able to expand this idea to other parameters (e.g., heavy mineral composition, rock type content and terrestrial material content) to estimate tsunami magnitude from palaeo-tsunami deposits themselves. This new approach allows us to improve the understanding of palaeo-tsunami generation and will contribute to disaster prevention along coastal regions.

Methods
We analysed the shapes of gravel particles more than 2 mm in diameter from tsunami deposits and modern sediments in beach and rivers. For tsunami deposits, we used the E1 to E11 tsunami deposits in the block samples obtained from the west, east, and south walls of the Koyadori trench21, Handy Geo-slicer29,30 (hereafter HGS) samples31 and outcrop samples (Fig. 1B). In the trench, the E1–E11 tsunami deposits were correlated because of their lateral continuity along the trench walls. In the HGS cores and outcrops, the E1–E4 tsunami deposits were also correlated with confidence because the HGS cores were drilled at 2.5 m intervals from the trench and the outcrop was exposed by construction of a shallow temporary canal. We also analysed modern samples obtained from two beach sites (B1 and B2) and six tributary sites (WR1–WR3 and ER1–ER3). On 19 July 2017, we sampled fluvial sediments on the riverbed at six sites (WR1–WR3 on the west tributary and ER1–ER3 on the east tributary; Fig. 1B and Supplementary Fig. S1C,D), where the AD 2011 Tohoku-oki tsunami did not inundate. On 20 July 2017, we sampled beach sediments on the surface at two beach survey lines (B1 and B2; Fig. 1B and Supplementary Fig. S1A,B). We sieved 2 mm larger particles (gravels) from washed samples. Then, we measured the roundness values of these gravels using the MATLAB program as shown below.

First, we arranged 200–400 gravel particles on a tray by hand such that they were not touching and took high-resolution photographs. Photographs were taken under front- and back-lit conditions using a NIKON D810 camera with AF-S Micro Nikkor 60 mm f/2.8 G ED and were recorded in RAW image format (see Supplementary Fig. S3). RAW files were processed into 328 to 343 pixels/cm JPEG images using Photoshop CS6.

Second, we analysed JPEG images taken under back-lit conditions in order to simplify the estimation of gravel boundaries using MATLAB (R2017b) and its toolboxes (Image Processing Toolbox, Statistics and Machine Learning Toolbox, Curve Fitting Toolbox, and Computer Vision System Toolbox). The JPEG true colour images were converted to grey scale intensity images (I) by forming a weighted sum of the R, G, and B components using a built-in function based on the following formula:

I=0.2989R+0.5870G+0.1140B
After upsizing to 656 to 686 pixel/cm resolution using bicubic interpolation to avoid jagged edges on the particle boundaries, greyscale images were binarised using a locally adaptive threshold, specified as intensity values using the built-in function32.

Finally, we measured the roundness values of binarised gravel images using a particle roundness computation in the MATLAB program33 with three constrained parameters. This program first estimates smoothed boundaries calculated from measured pixel points using a built-in function based on locally weighted scatter plot smoothing (LOESS) specified by α, which is a smoothing span described as a percentage of the total number of data points. The program subsequently divides smoothing boundaries into line segments at key points and uniquely identifies corner points from these key points. The segmentation is specified by a threshold δ0, which is the maximum allowed divergence between particle curve and segments, indicating that the corner identification is critically controlled by this parameter. Finally, this program finds the best-fit circle for each corner using the corner points. The fitness is controlled by threshold T/R, where T and R are the minimum distance and radius of the fit circle, respectively. The appropriate tangent circle is found where T approximately equals R. Roundness is defined as the size ratio of the average size of corner circles to the maximum inscribed circle of the particle; therefore, measuring roundness is critically controlled by these three parameters.

Because these parameters are mainly affected by the image resolution, we need to decide the best parameters. The best-fit parameters were estimated by comparison with manually measured roundness data from the same photographs using a grid search method, resulting in α, δ0 and T/R values of 0.06, 0.017, and 0.996, respectively. Using these best parameters, we measured the roundness of source materials and palaeo-tsunami deposits and estimated their distribution.

To calculate the mixture ratio, assuming that the roundness of the three source materials follows a normal distribution, we calculated their means and standard deviations to explain their roundness distribution in the following regions: beach (B1 and B2), west river (WR1–WR3), and east river (ER1–ER3). However, it is difficult to fit the roundness distribution of beach sediments to a single normal distribution; thus, we set two normal distributions to explain the distribution. Finally, we set four endmember parameters (see Supplementary Table S2) representing the roundness distribution of source materials.

We used only 2–8 mm size gravels from the three source materials for calculation because >98% of gravel in all tsunami deposits ranges from 2–8 mm. We assumed that tsunami deposits are a simple mixture of materials from beach and fluvial sediments eroded by tsunamis because tsunami deposits hardly contain chipped stones. Therefore, the roundness distribution of tsunami deposits could be explained by a Gaussian mixture distribution. Finally, we calculated the best fit mixture ratios using the least squares method by changing the four endmember ratios.

Abstract
Stromboli volcano (Aeolian Arc, Italy) experiences many mass failures along the Sciara del Fuoco (SdF) scar, which frequently trigger tsunamis of various sizes. In this work, we simulate tsunami waves generated by landslides occurring in the SdF through numerical simulations carried out in two steps: (i) the tsunami triggering, wave propagation and the effects on Stromboli are simulated using the 3D non-hydrostatic model NHWAVE; (ii) generated train waves are then input into the 2D Boussinesq model FUNWAVE-TVD to simulate wave propagation in the Southern Tyrrhenian Sea (STS). We simulated the following scenarios: (i) the tsunami runup, inland inundation and wave propagation at Stromboli triggered by submarine landslides with volumes of 6, 10, 15 and 20 × 106 m3 and subaerial landslides with volumes of 4, 6, 10 and 30 × 106 m3; (ii) tsunami propagation in the STS triggered by submarine landslides with volumes of 10 and 15 × 106 m3 and by subaerial landslides with volumes of 6 and 30 × 106 m3. We estimate that the damages of the last relevant tsunami at Stromboli, which occurred in 2002, could have been generated either by a subaqueous failure of about 15–20 × 106 m3 along the SdF or/and a subaerial failure of about 4–6 × 106 m3. The coasts most affected by this phenomenon are not necessarily located near the failure, because the bathymetry and topography can dramatically increase the waves heights locally. Tsunami waves are able to reach the first Stromboli populated beaches in just over 1 minute and the harbour in less than 7 minutes. After about 30 minutes the whole Aeolian Arc would be impacted by maximum tsunami waves. After 1 hour and 20 minutes, waves would encompass the whole STS arriving at Capri.

Introduction
Stromboli Island is an active volcano characterized by persistent Strombolian activity. This activity is periodically interrupted by flank eruptions or paroxysmal explosions1,2, which often contribute in generating large mass failures along the most unstable sector of the volcanic edifice: the Sciara del Fuoco (SdF) depression, on the NW flank of the island (Fig. 1). Landslides at Stromboli can be tsunamigenic3. Three tsunami deposits on Stromboli dating back to the Late Middle Ages, of which the oldest was related to a massive landslide, were recently discovered4. Since the early 20th century, six tsunamis generated by landslides within the SdF have been documented1,5,6. The last relevant tsunami at Stromboli occurred on 30 December 2002 as a consequence of the collapse of a large portion of the SdF, during the 2002–03 eruption7,8. The waves caused significant damage to the buildings on the east coast of the island up to an altitude of about 10 m above sea level, caused damage on Panarea and were largely detected along the Southern Tyrrhenian Sea (STS) coasts8,9. Simulation of tsunami waves resulting from the collapse of volcano portions is crucial in the STS where numerous active volcanoes (i.e. Stromboli, Vulcano, Lipari, Ischia and Marsili) are concentrated. In addition, the paucity of real data necessary to “instruct” the tsunami detection systems, as the two gauges off the SdF designed for real-time monitoring (http://lgs.geo.unifi.it), makes simulated data particularly valuable. This was dramatically noticeable during the 3 July 2019 and 28 August 2019 Stromboli’s paroxysms, when the two gauges recorded small tsunamis, reasonably due to the entrance of pyroclastic flows into the sea in front of the SdF10. Simulating a landslide-generated tsunami is particularly complex because it is necessary to take into account the landslide dynamics (aerial or submarine), its interaction with the water table, the wave generation and propagation and the runup on the coast. As a result, various numerical codes with different approaches and level of complexity have been developed to model landslide-generated tsunamis11. 2002 landslide-generated tsunami at Stromboli was simulated by Tinti et al.7 in two steps: (1) the landslide motion was computed using a Lagrangian block model to compute the instantaneous rate of the vertical displacement of the bottom surface caused by the motion of the underwater slide; (2) the output of step 1 was used as boundary conditions for a wave-propagation model based on shallow water equations and solved by means of a finite-element technique. Tinti et al.7 model is a depth average code that technically does not permit the computation of water flooding and water runup heights, but only the maximum water elevation at the coast. Therefore, Tinti et al.7 were not able to produce inland water penetration maps, and runups were approximated as the maximum water elevation at the coast, underestimating or even neglecting many processes such as positive interference of fronts, coastal morphology favouring confluence and transient piling up of incoming water masses and so on.

Figure 1
figure1
(a) Hillshading of Stromboli topo-bathymetric grid with the locations and shape of the simulated landslides based on Fig. 9 showed in Chiocci et al.33. PDC (Punta Dei Corvi) and PLB (Punta LaBronzo) are the locations of the monitoring gauges managed by the Laboratory of Experimental Geophysics of the Department of Earth Sciences of the University of Florence (http://lgs.geo.unifi.it/). White square shows the location of trenches described in Rosi et al.4. The inset shows the vertical cross section of the triggering slide (after Ma et al.12). Map was generated using Quantum GIS 2.8.1 software (https://www.qgis.org).

Full size image
In this work, we used the non-hydrostatic three-dimensional (sigma-layer) model NHWAVE12 to generate and propagate tsunami waves caused by various SdF flank failures, both aerial and subaqueous, as well as to estimate their impact on Stromboli. A fully nonlinear dispersive Boussinesq long wave model (FUNWAVE-TVD)13, initialized with the NHWAVE outputs, was used to simulate the propagation of tsunami waves in the STS. FUNWAVE-TVD was used because it is much faster than NHWAVE, allowing to considerably reduce the computational time for the larger computational grid. The novelty and advancements introduced by using NHWAVE and FUNWAVE-TVD for simulating tsunami at Stromboli are: (1) the possibility to compare the results of Tinti et al.7 with those obtained with different codes; (2) NHWAVE is not a simple depth average code, but a 3D code that allows a number of vertical levels; (3) NHWAVE can calculate directly inland penetration and runup; (4) NHWAVE and FUNWAVE-TVD are freely available codes; (5) NHWAVE and FUNWAVE-TVD are used by different research groups and have been benchmarked. This work is aimed at providing a more comprehensive tsunami impact assessment at Stromboli and in all STS coastlines by simulating for the first time several landslide scenarios at different scales of observation. Moreover, compared to previous works, we extend the study area as far as Capri to the north and Mondello to the west and we use updated topo-bathymetric data.

Tsunami Simulation
Computational grid
Bathymetry and topography play a crucial role in the tsunami waves dynamics and impact on the coastal areas. Bathymetry strongly influences tsunami propagation, both driving waves along preferential direction or creating natural dams able to break up the waves energy7,14. Coastal bathymetry and local inland topography controls the tsunami runup and inland penetration. For these reason, topo-bathymetric computational grid must be as updated as possible and must have the best possible resolution. Computational grids for tsunami simulation were here built by elaborating and merging data from different sources, with various coverage and acquisition time. The topography of Stromboli was acquired by using an airborne Light Detection and Ranging (LiDAR) system. The LiDAR survey was carried out in July 2010 by using an Optech ALTM Gemini laser altimeter15. The mean point density was 1 pts/m2 with a nominal horizontal and vertical accuracy of 40 and 15 cm, respectively. TINITALY 10-m digital elevation model16 was used as topography for the Southern Tyrrhenian areas, including the Aeolian Arc. Bathymetry covering most of the Southern Italian margins data was provided by the MaGIC project17 within the framework of the working group promoted by the Civil Protection Department (DPC) of Italy. MaGIC database provides data with spatial resolution decreasing with the depth, from 50 m to 100 and 200 m moving away from the coast. Bathymetric data from different sources18,19 and interpolated as described in Favalli and Pareschi20 were used where MaGIC data lacked. Before merging all grids together, the data collected was elaborated in order to correct the mismatching among adjacent grids from different sources and/or survey and artifacts as well as to fill areas with no-data. Two final topo-bathymetric computational grids in WGS84 UTM 33 coordinates were produced: (i) 920 × 660 pixels grid of Stromboli with a cell size of 10 m; (ii) 2959 × 3062 pixels grid of the STS with a cell size of 100 m. The 10 m grid was used as a computational grid for running the NHWAVE simulation of a submarine slide tsunami at Stromboli. In case of subaerial scenarios, the 10 m grid was down-sampled at 20 m and at 30 m to speed up calculation times. The 100 m grid was used as a computational grid for running the FUNWAVE-TVD simulation of the STS.

Numerical models
Tsunami generation, propagation and runup on Stromboli were simulated by using Non-Hydrostatic WAVE model (NHWAVE)12. It provides a numerical solution to the 3D Euler equations for incompressible flows in a terrain and surface-following σ coordinates (i.e., boundary fitted, 3–5 levels in this work). NHWAVE has been validated for highly dispersive landslide tsunami generation by comparing simulated surface elevations with data from laboratory experiments12,21. NHWAVE was successfully applied to study tsunami wave generation by submarine landslides22,23. NHWAVE can simulate tsunami generation by using three-dimensional rigid underwater landslides, treated as simple bottom movement with idealized shape and behavior12. The slide has a nearly elliptical footprint on the slope, with length b and width w, and vertical cross sections varying according to truncated hyperbolic secant functions in the two orthogonal directions, ξ and η, with maximum thickness T (Fig. 1, inset)12,21, which is given by:

ζ=T1−ε{sech(kbξ)sech(kwη)−ε}
(1)
where kb = 2 C/b, kw = 2 C/w and C = acossh(1/ε), with ε the truncation parameter. NHWAVE dictates the slide block motion to follow rectilinear trajectories, following the formalism in Enet et Grilli21 (cfr. formulas 7–11). The morphology of the SdF’s submarine portion is peculiar having a high-sloped deep depression initially directed northwestern that abruptly turns to north at about 1000 m below sea level (bsl)24 (Fig. 1). In order to force the slide to follow the bathymetry, we directly implemented in NHWAVE the equation that governs the center of mass motion parallel to the slope described in Enet et Grilli21 (cfr. formula 3), that is:

(Mb+ΔMb)s¨=(Mb−ρwVb)(sinθ−Cncosθ)g−12ρw(CFAw−CDAb)s˙2
(2)
where g is the gravitational acceleration; ΔMb, Vb, Aw and Ab are the slide added mass, volume, wetted surface area and main cross section perpendicular to the direction of motion, respectively; Cn is the basal Coulomb friction coefficient, CF is the skin friction coefficient and CD is the form drag coefficient. Equation (2) can be simplified to21:

(γ+Cm)s¨=(γ−1)(sinθ−Cncosθ)g−12CdAbVbs˙2
(3)
where Cm is the added mass coefficient, Cd the global drag coefficient and γ is the relative landslide density. Implementation of Eq. 2 inside NHWAVE also allows to simulate the aerial motion, after having accordingly changed the parameters. It is worth to note that in this case the code doesn’t take into account the water splash. NHWAVE is able to calculate maximum inundation area, runup and arrival time on the coasts. To understand which parameters mostly influence the code, a quick sensitivity analysis was performed by comparing the tsunami waveforms obtained varying volume, position, shape and density of the subaqueous triggering landslide. Aside from the starting position and density, which were constrained by volcanological observation (see below), the results show that the volume influences tsunami waves much more than the slide shape.

The STS tsunami propagation was simulated by using FUNWAVE-TVD model13,25 initialized with the surface elevation and depth-averaged horizontal velocity fields output by NHWAVE. FUNWAVE-TVD is developed based on the fully nonlinear Boussinesq equations of Chen26 and it uses a “total variation diminishing” (TVD) scheme to better model wave breaking dissipation and coastal inundation27,28,29,30,31. FUNWAVE-TVD was successfully validated by means of analytical, laboratory, and field benchmarks32. FUNWAVE was run by using the NHWAVE solution at t = 217 s on a 100 m pixel size grid, to avoid computational instabilities. This FUNWAVE initialization time allowed for the main waves train leaving Stromboli to be well defined and far enough from the coast to cope with the problems related to the transition from a multi-layer to a depth averaged code. Although FUNWAVE may account for runup and inundation area, a 100-m calculation grid prevented us from obtaining meaningful inundation areas. Hence, we here report just the height of tsunami waves near the Southern Tyrrhenian coasts, taking into account that it is a very rough approximation of the real runup.

Slide scenarios and 2002 field data
Given that the initial parameters of a triggering landslide at Stromboli are largely unknown and considering the sensitivity analysis performed here, only the variations in the slide volume were modeled. Four slide scenarios were considered for both subaerial and submarine mass failure. Based on volumes inferred by Chiocci et al.33, the extreme case scenarios hypothesized by Tommasi et al.34 for the 2002 tsunami and with the aim of identifying tsunami wave impact scenarios in the STS coasts, we simulated tsunamis generated by submarine slides of 6, 10, 15 and 20 × 106 m3 and subaerial slides of 4, 6, 10 and 30 × 106 m3. Landslides with these volumes (>106 m3) are among the worst-case scenario considered in the definition of the criticality levels for slope instability at Stromboli volcano proposed by Schaefer et al.35. These levels are based on the intersection between ground displacement monitoring data (the Ground-Based Interferometric Synthetic Aperture Radars, GBInSARs) and the instability scenario based on the results of the slope stability analysis. Moreover, recent studies have shown that landslides of the same order of magnitude as those of 30 December 2002 are always possible and that the conditions of stability of the Sciara del Fuoco have returned to be compatible with those preceding the 2002 landslides36,37,38,39.

The initial slides were placed as an additional elevation on the grids. Their locations were inferred based on the data collected after the 2002 tsunami at Stromboli33 and by considering the geometry imposed by the code, the input volumes and the SdF’s morphology. Aside from the worst case (i.e. 30 × 106 m3), the slides in all scenarios had a circular footprint with a radius of 670 m (Fig. 1). The 30 × 106 m3 slide had an elliptical footprint with the major axis (1300 m) following the inclination of SdF and the minor one (600 m) perpendicular to it (Fig. 1). Submarine slides centers coordinates were: x = 517563, y = 4295449 and z = −293 m. Centers coordinates of subaerial slides with circular footprints were: x = 518054, y = 4294622 and z = 250 m. Due to its size and footprint, the center coordinates for the 30 × 106 m3 slide were: x = 518186, y = 4294600 and z = 350 m (Fig. 1). Coordinates are in WGS84, UTM 33 reference system. To account for the different volumes, the slide thickness changed for every scenario, i.e. for the 4, 6, 10, 15, 20 and 30 × 106 m3 cases, the maximum thicknesses were respectively 29.9, 45.0, 74.7, 112.0, 194.4 and 149.4 m. Considering the slide as rigid body of volcanoclastic material, a constant density of 2600 kg/m3 was chosen. Model basal friction was kept constant.

Simulated runup and inundations at Stromboli were compared with the effects of the 2002 tsunami. Considering that the existing literature presents some differences in describing the 2002’s inundation areas, this data was extracted by comparing the data from Tinti et al.8, Dall’Osso et al.40 and the unpublished INGV technical report drawn up soon after the tsunami, as well as considering the local topography. The measured runup on Stromboli was taken from Tinti et al.7. The detection of tsunami waves, along the coast of the STS, was described by Maramai et al.9. All collected data were georeferenced, uploaded and analyzed in a GIS environment.

Results and Discussion
Landslide kinematics and tsunami generation
Slide velocities have a trend coherent with that calculated by Tinti et al.7, i.e. an initial sharp acceleration followed by a phase of slow deceleration (Fig. 2). Slides with the same planimetric footprint have the same velocity despite different volumes. Indeed, the equation of motion described in Eq. (3) depends on the slide geometry only through the term AbVb=1b. It follows that slides with the same b have the same kinematics. Figure 2 shows that aerial slides with circular footprint have a maximum velocity (vmax) of about 70 m/s, which is reached in 16 s at a depth of 150 m. The 30 × 106 m3 slide has vmax = 80 m/s, achieved in 26 s at 500 m bsl. Tinti et al.7 calculated vmax for the aerial slides of just under 60 m/s after about 20 s from the trigger. Our submarine slides have vmax = 49 m/s after 60 s at about 1000 m bsl. Tinti et al.7 calculated a maximum velocity for the submarine slide of about 40–45 m/s after 40–50 s from the trigger. Figure 2 clearly shows that all velocities tend towards a terminal velocity, which depends on the slope41,42. The landslide efficiency in wave generation is controlled by the Froude number (F), given by the speed of the landslide relative to the linear shallow water depth wave celerity gh−−√ (wave speed in Fig. 2). An efficient wave generation is given by F = 1, which means that the landslide and the tsunami move with the same speed. The further F departs from 1, the less efficient the wave generation is. Aerial slides reach F = 1 at the intersection between the slide velocity curve and the waves speed parabola. Viceversa, the submarine slides always have F less than 1. At equal volume and shape, aerial slides have higher tsunamigenic potentials than submarine ones. F = 1 is reached by aerial circular slides after 25 s with a slide velocity of 67 m/s, at 461 m bsl. The Froude number of the 30 × 106 m3 slide is 1 after 34 s from the trigger at 673 m bsl when the velocity is 80 m/s. The maximum F for submarine slides is 0.56, reached after 34 s with a speed of 44 m/s at 616 m bsl. Submarine slides of different volumes, given by different thicknesses in our case, have the same F, but the waves generated (Fig. 3) and the effects on the coast are different (Fig. 4). The tsunamigenic potential of a slide does not depend only on F but also on slide thickness.

Figure 2
figure2
Velocity of the slides vs. depth. Terminal velocity and wave speed are also reported. Slides with same planimetric footprint have the same velocity.

Full size image
Figure 3
figure3
Wave shapes calculated at the monitoring gauges of PDC and PLB. Legends at PDC are also applies for PLB. Comparison between the waves generated by the aerial slide of 6 × 106 m3 and the subaqueous slides of 15 × 106 m3 are shown in frames (e,f).

Full size image
Figure 4
figure4
Observed and simulated tsunami effects comparison at Stromboli. (a) Stromboli map representing the maximum simulated inundation and wave height for a tsunami caused by a submarine slide along the SdF of 15 × 106 m3. Map was generated using Quantum GIS 2.8.1 software (https://www.qgis.org). (b) Comparison between the 2002 runups observed by Tinti et al.7 and runups simulated in case of submarine scenarios.

Full size image
Two monitoring gauges managed by the Laboratory of Experimental Geophysics of the Department of Earth Sciences of the University of Florence (http://lgs.geo.unifi.it/), designed to detect tsunami waves, are located offshore Punta Dei Corvi and Punta Labronzo (Fig. 1). On account of the absence of real data on tsunami waves, at the first instance the alert system necessarily had to be based on simulated waves. Figure 3 shows the wave shapes calculated at the two monitoring gauges for all scenarios. As expected, the first wave of the submarine slides is negative while the aerial slide produces a first positive wave followed by a negative wave with greater amplitude. The first maximum/minimum waves are detected at the gauges after 40–55 s from slide triggering. Figure 3 also highlights a rough proportionality between the amplitude of the first maximum/minimum and the slide volume.

As reported after the 2002 tsunami, NHWAVE simulations show that although the higher tsunami waves propagate in the northwestward direction, relevant waves are also driven by island bathymetry around Stromboli and they hit inhabited areas (Figs. 4 and 5).

Figure 5
figure5
Observed and simulated tsunami effects comparison at Stromboli. (a) Stromboli map representing the maximum simulated inundation and wave height for a tsunami caused by an aerial slide along the SdF of 6 × 106 m3. Map was generated using Quantum GIS 2.8.1 software (https://www.qgis.org). (b) Comparison between the 2002 runup observed by Tinti et al.7 and runups simulated in case of subaerial scenarios.

Full size image
Proximal impact: Tsunami effect on stromboli island
Figures 4a and 5a illustrate the simulated maximum wave heights and inundation generated by a submarine failure of 15 × 106 m3 and by an aerial failure of 6 × 106 m3 on the most inhabited and frequented coast of Stromboli. We represented in Figs. 4a and 5a only these scenarios because they better fit the impact of 2002 tsunami at Stromboli. Figures 4b and 5b show simulated runups versus the 2002 measured runups8. Simulations demonstrate that the waves’ impact on the coast is not only directly related to the distance from the source but it is also strongly influenced by the topography and the bathymetry. Starting from the SdF and moving clockwise (towards Stromboli’s Harbor), the runup is initially high on Spiaggia Lunga beach, then it decreases up to Scalo dei Balordi and it drastically increases to a local maximum between Attracco Cisterna and Punta Lena (Figs. 4b and 5b).

In the following paragraph we discuss the simulated tsunami impact regarding only the Northeastern frequented areas between Spiaggia Lunga beach and the Harbor (Porto). Waves generated by the 6 × 106 m3 subaqueous slide would cause concerns only along the beaches. The maximum penetration (~30 m) and runup (~8 m) are on the beach between Ficogrande and Punta Lena (Fig. 4b). The 10 × 106 m3 slide causes significant inundation on the main beaches. Just before Punta Lena, waves affect not only the shore but also the residential area. The simulation shows here a maximum penetration of ~110 m and a runup locally over 10 m. It is worth to note that in this area the simulation overestimates the impact of the 2002 event (Fig. 4b). The 15 × 106 m3 slide scenario fits well the impact of the 2002 tsunami along the north-east coast of Stromboli, both as inland penetration (Fig. 4a) and runup (Fig. 4b). The simulated runup is often over 10 m between Spiaggia Lunga and Punta Restuccia and between Ficogrande and Punta Lena. The maximum penetration is ~250 m at Punta Lena. Compared to the 2002 event, the simulation overestimates the tsunami impact on the inland of Punta Lena and underestimates it on the beach in front of the power plant (Enel, Fig. 4a). Differently, the 20 × 106 m3 slide impact fits well with the 2002 tsunami effects between Enel and Porto, while it overestimates even more the water inland penetration around Punta Lena (>250 m). The 20 × 106 m3 scenario shows a stretch of runup just below 15 m between Attracco Cisterna and Punta Lena. The arrival time of the highest waves on the coast is highly fragmented because they are formed as a consequence of waves refraction-diffraction along the rugged coastline. For this reason, in Fig. 4a we report the arrival time of the first positive surface perturbation, which is not affected by interaction with previous waves. In general, the waves’ travel time is quite similar through different scenarios. The first positive wave hits Spiaggia Lunga after just above 1 minute from the slide failure, in 2–3 minutes it reaches Punta Lena and in just under 3.5 minutes arrives at Porto, i.e. about 3 km far from the source. The maximum wave hits Spiaggia Lunga after 2–2.5 minutes, Punta Lena in 5–9 minutes and Porto in about 5 minutes.

At equal volume, aerial slides generate more devastating waves compared to subaqueous ones. The 4 × 106 m3 slide would already be capable of largely inundating the north-east coast with a runup of 10–11 m (locally even more) between Ficogrande and Punta Lena with a maximum penetration of ~90 m. This runup fits well with the observed 2002 runup but the inundation area is underestimated after Punta Lena. The 6 × 106 m3 aerial slide has a stronger impact than the subaqueous slide of the same volume. The water inland penetration fits well with 2002 tsunami impact with the exception of the area between Punta Lena and Enel where simulation overestimates it with a maximum penetration reaching ~240 m (Fig. 5a). The runups in the heavily affected area, i.e. between Attracco Cisterna and Punta Lena, range from ~8 to ~18 m (Fig. 5b). The 10 × 106 m3 aerial slide causes large inundation with maximum runups ranging from 12 to 19 m, again between Attracco Cisterna and Punta Lena. Finally, the 30 × 106 m3 aerial slide would cause dramatic inundations. Runups higher than 30 m would interest the coast between Spiaggia Lunga and Punta Restuccia. The areas between Attracco Cisterna and Punta Lena would be affected by a runup of over 20 m. As for the arrival of the first waves, similarly to the subaqueous scenarios, the travel time is very similar for the different slide volumes. The first perturbation hits Spiaggia Lunga after ~1.5 minutes from the failure, it reaches Punta Lena about 1–1.5 minute later and arrives at the harbor in under 4 minutes. From the complex pattern of arrival time of the maximum perturbation, we can infer that the highest wave hits Spiaggia Lunga in 2–2.5 minutes, hits Punta Lena in about 3–6 minutes and the harbor in 4–7 minutes.

Distal impact: Tsunami effect on aeolian arc and south tyrrhenian coasts
Tsunami simulations on the extended computational grid were run with the FUNWAVE-TVD model by using as initial condition the wave train generated by 10 and 15 million submarine slides and 6 and 30 million aerial slides. From Stromboli, waves trains propagate in any direction impacting the neighboring islands of Aeolian Arc at first and then the remaining Southern Tyrrhenian Coast of Italy. Due to the directional behavior of landslide generated tsunami waves, even coasts very far from the source can be seriously damaged (Fig. 6). Arrival time of the maximum height (and in brackets of the first perturbation) is again similar for all the simulated scenarios. Panarea is impacted in 8–10 (5) minutes; Lipari, Salina and Vulcano are hit in 10–15 (7–8) minutes and in ~30 (13) minutes the whole Aeolian Arc is interested by tsunami waves. In 40–50 (25) minutes waves are offshore of Palinuro and in ~70 (28) minutes offshore of Mondello and Palermo. In ~80 (35) minutes waves arrive at Capri (Fig. 6). Tropea, which is in the opposite direction of the main train propagation, is hit in just under 20 (12) minutes. For the 10 × 106 m3 subaqueous slide, the simulation shows a maximum wave of about 1 m, 100 m (i.e. grid cell size) offshore of Panarea and a maximum wave of 0.5–1.1 m and 0.8 m off the north coasts of Salina and Lipari, respectively. Off the east coast of Volcano Island, in front of the flat highly inhabited area, the maximum simulated waves are 0.3 m high on average. In the area around Palermo, Mondello is the most impacted area with a maximum wave of 0.3 m. In the rest of the STS, along the coasts of Marina di Camarota, Capri and Tropea, maximum waves reach 0.6 m, 0.2 m and 0.5 m. The 15 × 106 m3 subaqueous slide would generate maximum waves of 1–1.4 m, 0.6–1.8 m, 1.4 m and 0.5 m for Panarea, Salina, Lipari and Vulcano, respectively. Maximum waves of 0.4 m, 0.8 m, 0.4 m and 0.8 m are calculated along the coasts of Mondello, Marina di Camarota, Capri and Tropea. The 6 × 106 m3 aerial slide generates wave that reaches 0.8–1.8 m, 0.5–1.2 m, 0.8 m and 0.4 m along the coasts of Panarea, Lipari, Salina and Vulcano. Waves of 0.3 m, 0.6 m, 0.3 m and 0.6 m are calculated offshore of Mondello, Marina di Camarota, Capri and Tropea, respectively. The tsunami generated by a 30 × 106 m3 aerial slide would severely impacts Panarea with maximum waves up to 4.5 m. Similarly, waves in front of the north coast of Salina and Lipari range from 2 m to 5 m. Waves of 1.5 m can be found in the most vulnerable area of Vulcano. The rest of the Southern Tyrrhenian coasts can be hardly damaged, e.g. waves of 1 m are expected off of Mondello, up to 2.4 m off of Marina di Camarota and 2.2 m off of Tropea. Finally, simulated waves arrive offshore of Capri with a maximum height of 2 m.

Figure 6
figure6
Map illustrating the maximum simulated wave height in the STS caused by a submarine slide of 15 × 106 m3. Dots represent sites where anomalous waves were observed (white dots) or not observed (black dots) after the 2002 event at Stromboli by Maramai et al.9. Location of Amalfi is also reported. Map was generated using Quantum GIS 2.8.1 software (https://www.qgis.org).

Full size image
Comparison with previous works
Landslide-generated tsunami at Stromboli was already simulated by using a wave-propagation model based on shallow water equations, initialized by the vertical displacement of the bottom surface caused by the motion of the underwater slide, by Tinti et al.7,43,44. Tinti et al.43 simulated a tsunami triggered by a massive landslide of about 1 km3 and its effects on Stromboli and along the south-east Tyrrhenian Sea, approximately between Lamezia (Calabria) and Capo d’Orlando (Sicily). This scenario is consistent with that descripted by Rosi et al.4, although Tinti et al.43 did not extend their results as far as the Campanian coast. In order to reconstruct the 2002 tsunami at Stromboli, Tinti et al.7 simulated four scenarios: (i) two submarine slides of 16 × 106 m3 volume with different shapes; (ii) one aerial slide with a 5 × 106 m3 volume; and (iii) one slide partly submerged and partly emerged. Tinti et al.44 simulated tsunamis triggered by slides located outside the SdF scar. The models used by Tinti et al.7,43,44 calculate neither the runups nor the flooding, thus neglecting the role of local topography. Where inland topography plays a major role in assessing the tsunami impact, this code may not be appropriate7, possibly leading to an underestimation/overestimation of the tsunami hazard and risk assessment. Although the NHWAVE code used here treats the slide as a rigid body, which is a rougher approximation than that of Tinti et al.7, it calculates the runup and the inland flooding taking into account the role of topography in the tsunami impact. 16 × 106 m3 subaqueous scenarios and 5 × 106 m3 subaerial scenarios of Tinti et al.7 can be compared with our scenarios of similar volume, i.e. the 15 × 106 m3 subaqueous slide and the 6 × 106 m3 subaerial slide, respectively. The travel times of the first perturbations are in agreement: for both simulations Punta Lena is affected by the tsunami after 2.5–3 minutes (Fig. 4) and Panarea is hit after 5–6 minutes. Tinti et al.7 show the offshore shapes of tsunami waves at several computational tide gauges, two of which are not far from PDC and PLB locations, although closer to the coast (Fig. 1). Maximum tsunami waves of the subaqueous scenario of Tinti et al.7 are higher, compared to our simulation. The wave peaks of Tinti et al.7 are above 10 m at Punta Labronzo and above 5 meters at Punta Chiappe, not far from PDC (Fig. 1). In this work, the maximum waves at PDC and PLB are around 4 and 6 m, respectively (Fig. 2). This difference can be easily ascribed to sampling point locations closer to the coast in the case of Tinti et al.7. The “extreme water elevation” of Tinti et al.7 and the here simulated runups of Fig. 4 show a common trend, in spite of a general underestimation of the tsunami effects by Tinti et al.7. These differences can be partially ascribed to the role of topography on the tsunami impact on the coast. For example, in our simulation Punta Lena results as one of the most exposed areas (Fig. 4). This area can be affected by tsunami waves coming from north, east and south-east. This cumulative effect is taken into account in our simulation. Field data confirm that Punta Lena is particularly exposed to tsunami flooding (Fig. 4a, yellow line). As concerns the aerial slide, the maximum waves sampled by Tinti et al.7 in the computed tide-gauges nearest to PDC and PLB are about 6 m, while in our simulation they are 8 m at PDC and just below 6 m at PLB. The maximum “synthetic runup” in Tinti et al.7 calculated for the 5 × 106 m3 slide generally underestimates the measured runup. The maximum “synthetic runup” far from the SdF is in Ficograde with a value of about 7 m. Our 6 × 106 m3 slide simulation generally overestimates the runups, which are better fitted by the 4 × 106 m3 scenario (Fig. 5b).

Tinti et al.43 simulated a tsunami triggered by a massive landslide of about 1 km3. Slide peak velocity was about 65 m/s. After 120 s, the first perturbation went past Punta Lena where a “synthetic runup” of about 35 m was calculated. A first perturbation reached Lipari in 400 s and then Sicily in 800 s. The highest extreme water elevation in Calabria was about 7.5 m east to Tropea, which was hit 13 minutes after the slide failure. Our worst scenario was triggered by an aerial slide of 30 × 106 m3, and it reaches a peak velocity of 80 m/s (Fig. 2) and its first perturbation hit Punta Lena in 2.5 minutes with a runup of 20 m. The maximum perturbation hits the coast to the east of Tropea in just above 15 minutes with 2 m high waves, while the first perturbation arrived after 13 minutes, consistent with Tinti et al.43. The location of the trenches excavated by Rosi et al.4 would have been inundated even by a tsunami triggered by a 30 × 106 m3 slide. This slide would also cause waves of ca. 0.5 m offshore Amalfi. Despite difference in the slide volume, this work provides a first analysis of the area that might have been impacted by a massive event like those proposed in Rosi et al.4.

Conclusion
The NHWAVE model, with a modified implementation of the slide motion, was used to simulate: i) tsunami generation by aerial and submarine slides along the SdF with various volumes; ii) the waves propagation and impact on the northeastern coasts of Stromboli. NHWAVE solution was then input to the FUNWAVE-TVD model in order to simulate tsunami waves propagation in the STS. NHWAVE is capable of simulating landslide tsunami generation, propagation and impact. In the case of tsunami simulations at Stromboli, NHWAVE had to be adapted to account for aerial landslides and for subaqueous curvilinear trajectories. It also requires huge calculation resources and time, limiting its use both for (almost) real-time purposes and for simulating wave propagation over large computational domains as the STS is. Moreover initialization of the depth-averaged code FUNWAVE-TVD with the output of the multilayer NHWAVE is affected by noise and instabilities. Finally, in order to calculate significant runups, it is mandatory to have a topo-bathymetric grid of proper accuracy and resolution.

The following main conclusions can be drawn from this work:

At equal volume, aerial slides generate higher waves and runup than the submarine ones (Figs. 3, 4B and 5B). Indeed, at equal volume (i.e. equal thickness in our simulation) the aerial slides go through the maximum tsunamigenic Froude value of 1, while the submarine slides, in our case, always stay under F = 0.56 (Fig. 2). Although the undersea part of the Sciara del Fuoco is more unstable than the aerial one, the small tsunamis triggered by the PDCs occurred on 3 July and 28 August 2019 shifted the attention towards subaerial tsunami source. As expected, the aerial slide produces a first positive wave; on the contrary the first wave of the submarine slide is negative (Fig. 3);

By comparing observed and simulated data, we estimate that the 2002 Stromboli tsunami damages could have been generated either by a subaqueous failure of about a 15–20 × 106 m3 along the SdF or a subaerial failure of about 4–6 × 106 m3 (Figs. 4 and 5). These results are in general agreement with those of Tinti et al.7;

There is no linear correlation between the tsunami effects and the distance from the source. Bathymetry is very important and can dramatically increase the waves heights locally7,14. Topography is also important because it determines the inundation area. Where inland topography plays a major role in the tsunami impact, it is necessary to calculate runups and inland penetration to avoid underestimation/overestimation in assessing tsunami hazard and risk;

The most hazardous inhabited area at Stromboli is the stretch of coast comprised between Attracco Cisterna and Punta Lena. This can be related both to the convex saddles between Stromboli and Strombolicchio and the coastal topography (Figs. 4 and 5);

The first tsunami waves generated along the SdF are able to reach the first populated beaches in just over 1 minute and to hit the Stromboli harbor in just under 3.5 minutes. Maximum waves arrive to Panarea in just over 8–10 minutes and in 30 minutes go past the Aeolian Arc. In 1 hour and 20 minutes, maximum waves travel through the whole STS arriving offshore of Capri;

Several factors, not all related to the source, influence how strong the impact of the tsunami waves can be. In our case, the directional behavior of a landslide-generated tsunami, the position of the coast in regard to the source, as well as the bathymetry, explain the high waves arriving offshore of Marina di Camerota (Fig. 6), about 130 km from the source, and can also explain the zoned distribution of sites (Fig. 6) where the 2002 tsunami waves were observed9.

This study can improve the understanding of the triggering mechanism and the wave impact of future tsunami at Stromboli as in the case of the small tsunami occurred during the 3 July 2019 and 28 August 2019 paroxysms.

Abstract
Tsunami modelling of potential and historic events in Australia’s Sydney Harbour quantifies the potentially damaging impacts of an earthquake generated tsunami. As a drowned river valley estuary exposed to distant source zones, these impacts are predominantly high current speeds (>2 m/s), wave amplification and rapid changes in water level. Significant land inundation only occurs for scenarios modelled with the largest waves (9.0 MW source). The degree of exposure to the open ocean and the geomorphology of locations within the Harbour determine the relative level of these impacts. Narrow, shallow channels, even those sheltered from the open ocean, create a bottleneck effect and experience the highest relative current speeds as well as elevated water levels. The largest maximum water levels (>8 m) occur in exposed, funnel-shaped bays and wave amplification is greatest at locations exposed to the open ocean: >7 times deep water wave heights for 9.0 MW source waves. Upstream attenuation rates of runup and maximum water level show a linear correlation with wave height parameters at the 100 m depth contour and may provide some predictive capabilities for potential tsunami impacts at analogous locations. In the event of a tsunami in Sydney Harbour, impacts may threaten marine traffic and infrastructure.

Introduction
Tsunami are one of the key natural hazards that threaten coasts globally. Tsunami impacts range from those only detectable by instruments to those, such as the Indian Ocean tsunami of 2004, which devastated communities across an entire region and was the deadliest tsunami in recorded history1. The impacts of tsunami are known to vary for different coastal morphological environments. Estuaries, such as the Vellar estuary in India2, along with estuaries in Chile3 and Japan4,5,6, have been observed to experience tsunami inundation many times that of the adjacent open ocean coastline, as the estuary facilitates tsunami propagation further inland. Estuaries are also known to experience wave height increases and modifications7 as a result of the tsunami waves interacting with the bathymetry8,9 and bay shape10. For estuaries with complex geomorphology, such as Australia’s Sydney Harbour, detailed tsunami modelling is the most accurate way to determine potential tsunami impact.

The city of Sydney in New South Wales (NSW), Australia’s most populated city, is centred on the picturesque Sydney Harbour (Port Jackson; Fig. 1). Sydney Harbour is both a working port and major location for recreational boating and leisure with large numbers of people on and around the water every day. There is geological and historical evidence for tsunami affecting Sydney and the NSW coastline11 and the NSW State Emergency Service (SES) Tsunami Emergency Sub Plan estimates a large tsunami with the potential to impact the entire NSW coast would directly threaten between 250,000 and 1.5 million people12.

Figure 1
figure1
Study site and locations selected to represent potential tsunami impact within the context of the model domain. Grid coordinates are provided in WGS84 UTM zone 56S. Image created by KMW using ESRI ArcMap 10.3.1 http://www.esri.com/arcgis/about-arcgis with elevation (https://ecat.ga.gov.au/geonetwork/srv/eng/search#!a05f7892-fae9-7506-e044-00144fdd4fa6) and coastline data (https://ecat.ga.gov.au/geonetwork/srv/eng/search#!a05f7892-eae3-7506-e044-00144fdd4fa6) from © Commonwealth of Australia (Geoscience Australia) 2017.

Full size image
Although the tsunami hazard level for NSW is considered moderate13,14, it is present. One of the most catalogued historic tsunami events to affect Sydney Harbour is the 9.5 MW Chilean tsunami of May 196015. This tsunami was caused by a subduction zone earthquake, as are the majority of tsunami globally (~73%)16. Accounts from the 1960 Chilean event include reports of unusually large wave heights, extreme current speeds, and rapid changes in water level. The direct impacts of this event included dragged and broken moorings, vessels being swept into bridges and wharfs, as well as significant scouring and localised coastal erosion15. In contrast, the 2011 9.1 MW Tohoku Japanese tsunami was recorded by Sydney Harbour tide gauges but no damage was reported for this event17.

The geomorphological shapes of estuaries can result in amplified tsunami impacts even during minor events. For example, strong currents caused by tsunami, have been known to cause significant damage in estuaries even when little or no runup or inundation has occurred15,18. In California, current speeds of approximately 4.5 m/s resulting from the 2011 Japanese tsunami caused over US$50 million of damage in harbours across the state despite warnings being issued. The tsunami arrived in California at low tide and so these high current speeds were coupled with very little inundation above the average high tide level18. Reports of tsunami generated current induced damage in estuarine ports and harbours have included ships being torn from moorings and subsequent groundings or impact15,19,20,21. In instances when warnings have been given and vessels were evacuated from harbours or restricted from entering harbours, less damage occurred18.

An additional tsunami generated hazard that has been shown to be particularly damaging to estuarine ports and harbours includes depths outside of the normal tidal range. Abnormally low minimum depths, abnormally high maximum depths, and rapid changes in depth caused by water movement during a tsunami are a hazard to estuary users and, in particular, to vessel navigation. Issues can arise where under keel clearance may be at a premium22 and/or vessel traffic requires passage underneath low bridges. The morphological changes caused by the erosion and deposition of sediment can also alter depths significantly, with depths remaining dramatically altered after the tsunami event is over12,18,23. For locations such as Sydney Harbour, some distance from the nearest source zones and less likely to experience extreme inundation, high current speeds and depth variation may be the dominant impact of a tsunami.

Previous research has shown that tsunami wave trains and the tide interact in a non-linear manner in estuaries24,25,26. The major cause of the tsunami-tide interaction has been demonstrated to be tidally induced ocean depth changes24. It has been shown that the tide-tsunami interaction can result in either intensification or damping of cumulative tsunami-tide impacts, depending on mean basin depth24. Changes in depth due to the ocean tide, alter the tsunami propagation, amplification, and dissipation, thus it is crucial in modelling studies that the tide and tsunami are appropriately coupled to reduce the limitations of the model24,25,26.

The Joint Australian Tsunami Warning Centre (JATWC) has completed rupture and deep water propagation modelling of numerous tsunami scenarios in order to create a tsunami scenario database for Australia: T2. The T2 database includes tsunami scenarios generated by earthquakes of 7.0, 7.5, 8.0, 8.5 and 9.0 MW from source zones relevant to Australia and allows these tsunami scenarios to be extracted at any deep water location27. Shallow water inundation modelling is then required to estimate the potential coastal and terrestrial impacts of these tsunami scenarios.

Previous shallow water modelling for the Sydney region includes the tsunami modelling of Botany and Bate Bay, two estuaries to the south of Sydney, (see Fig. 1) by Dall’Osso et al.28. Dall’Osso et al.28 used static tides and tsunami scenarios with Average Recurrence Intervals (ARI) of 100, 1,000 and 10,000 years to investigate maximum inundation extents and maximum flow velocities. Their research also indicated the number of buildings that would potentially experience inundation. Another larger study, by Cardno14,29 also completed modelling for Botany Bay as well as coarse modelling of the outer portion of Sydney Harbour with a detailed focus on Manly. The work by Cardno modelled tsunami with dynamic tides14,29 and showed the vulnerability of Manly to inundation. The Cardno study also identified the areas of Botany Bay susceptible to inundation from scenarios with ARI ranging from 200 to 10,000 years. The Cardno scenarios were sourced from Kermadec, New Hebrides, Puysegur, South Chile and Tonga trenches.

Previous efforts have also been made to develop attenuation rules for some types of estuaries. Leonard et al.30 created a GIS based attenuation rule for maximum water level of tsunami propagation up rivers in Samoa. This was validated to some extent in the same paper and later against the East Japan (Tohoku) tsunami of 2011 by Fraser & Power31 with a greater focus on maximum potential runup. This rule describes a 0.25% maximum water level attenuation up-river (i.e. 1 m water level attenuation for every 400 m of distance travelled up-river). The derived attenuation rule for maximum potential runup uses a specified and calculable maximum potential runup at the coast, then follows the same attenuation rule as maximum water level attenuation, with an additional rule of 1 m maximum runup attenuation for every 50 m travelled across land from the river banks31.

Sydney Harbour is classed as a drowned river valley estuary under the Roy et al.32 morphological classification system. Drowned river valleys typically occur in deeply incised bedrock valleys, opening into a semi-protected bay32. Although comprehensive modelling provides the most reliable estimate of potential tsunami impacts, it is not always possible. The observation of rules or tsunami impact patterns can help provide first pass estimates of potential tsunami impacts for comparable locations where modelling is not possible as well as help further our understanding of tsunami behaviour.

To our knowledge, this paper presents the first validated, high-resolution tsunami inundation model for the full extent of Sydney Harbour (Port Jackson), from the estuary mouth to Parramatta (see Fig. 1). In this study we provide a comprehensive account of the potential tsunami impacts for this iconic estuary, suggest attenuation patterns and highlight the geomorphological features that show the most vulnerability to tsunami impacts. We present these results with a view to deepening understanding of tsunami impacts in drowned river valleys with distant source zones.

Results
Here we use the hydrodynamic model ANUGA to simulate tsunami inundation in Sydney Harbour for a range of potential and historic scenarios (Table 1). ANUGA solves the non-linear shallow water wave equations to describe tsunami behaviour at each node in an unstructured triangular elevation mesh and for each time step over a specified time period. These calculations were completed for every scenario modelled and results were extracted to describe terrestrial inundation, flow velocities, water levels and wave heights across the study site. Scenarios are named according to the source zone, the magnitude of earthquake from which the tsunami was modelled, and the tidal stage the tsunami was modelled to coincide with (Table 1). For example, NH90high represents a wave generated by a 9.0 MW earthquake at the New Hebrides trench that is modelled such that the maximum wave in the tsunami wave train is coincident with the peak of the high tide.

Table 1 Details of all tsunami scenarios modelled. PTHA estimated ARI represents the Annual Recurrence Interval as estimated by the Probabilistic Tsunami Hazard Analysis of Australia (Burbidge et al.33).
Full size table
The Probabilistic Tsunami Hazard Analysis of Australia (PTHA)33 provides the numerical relationship between maximum wave amplitude of a tsunami wave train with Average Recurrence Intervals (ARI) for locations across Australia and in this case for Sydney Harbour. Using the data from the PTHA, the ARI of the potential tsunami scenarios modelled were estimated to be 100–4700 for those sourced from earthquakes ≥8.5 MW, and 25–50 for those of ≤8.0 MW (Table 1). It should be noted that this is a statistical relationship that may resolve better for wave trains with larger ARI.

Maximum Inundation Extent
Terrestrial inundation increases with increasing earthquake magnitude, with significant inundation limited to the highest magnitude events modelled. The majority of inundation occurs in the low-lying embayments along the southern side of the Harbour (Fig. 2a) and across the low lying isthmus connecting North Head to Northern Sydney in Manly (Fig. 3 and see Fig. 1 for location). The two scenarios with the largest waves, NH90high and P90high, both stand out as having maximum inundation extents significantly greater than other scenarios modelled (Fig. 2b). Historic events modelled with historic tides showed inundation too minimal to be visible in Fig. 2: Toh2011historic resulted in 0.006 ha above the high tide level and Chi1960historic, 0.039 ha.

Figure 2
figure2
Maximum inundation extent, maximum inundation area and 80th percentile mean runup. (a) Maximum inundation extents for tsunami scenarios coinciding with a high tide with Rushcutters Bay shown in detail in the inset. The 10 m elevation contour is provided for reference and the red star represents the Sydney Central Business District (CBD) as per Fig. 1. Grid coordinates are provided in WGS84 UTM zone 56S. Image created by KMW using ESRI ArcMap 10.3.1 http://www.esri.com/arcgis/about-arcgis, coastline data (https://ecat.ga.gov.au/geonetwork/srv/eng/search#!a05f7892-eae3-7506-e044-00144fdd4fa6) from © Commonwealth of Australia (Geoscience Australia) 2017 and satellite imagery from the USGS landsat collection (https://earthexplorer.usgs.gov/). (b) Maximum area inundated above the high tide level for all scenarios modelled. It should be noted that due to the constraints on mesh resolutions, areas with minor inundation are not well resolved. The legend indicates model scenarios, which were modelled for peak waves to coincide with a ‘low’ or ‘high’ tide. (c) The correlation between the input scenario Hmax value at the 100 m depth contour model boundary condition and the maximum area inundated. The legend indicates which scenarios were modelled for peak waves to coincide with a ‘low’ or ‘high’ tide. (d) The mean of the 80th percentile maximum runup values above the spring high tide level, per km. The distance from Sydney Harbour entrance is provided on the ‘x’ axis. Data shown represents the south side of the Harbour.

Full size image
Figure 3
figure3
Maximum inundation extent and inundation depths for tsunami scenario P90high for the high resolution Manly model (maximum triangle area of 2 m2). Depths are given relative to MSL and grid coordinates are provided in WGS84 UTM zone 56S. Image created by KMW using ESRI ArcMap 10.3.1 (http://www.esri.com/arcgis/about-arcgis), coastline data (https://ecat.ga.gov.au/geonetwork/srv/eng/search#!a05f7892-eae3-7506-e044-00144fdd4fa6) from © Commonwealth of Australia (Geoscience Australia) 2017 and satellite imagery from the USGS landsat collection (https://earthexplorer.usgs.gov/).

Full size image
Maximum inundation extents were shown to be dependent on whether the peak tsunami waves coincided with a low or high tide, using spring tides extracted from observed data in January 2015. All scenarios in which peak tsunami waves coincided with high tide showed some inundation above the spring high tide level, with NH90high (6 ha) and P90high (12 ha) inundating areas 3–4 times greater than that of other high tide scenarios (Fig. 2b). For scenarios where peak waves coincided with low tide, inundation above the spring high tide level is only observed in scenarios NH85low, P85low, NH90low, and P90low (Fig. 2b). Significant inundation only occurred in scenarios with the largest wave heights (NH90low and P90low; Fig. 2b). In all scenarios modelled, inundation is restricted to locations below 10 m elevation (Fig. 2a) and, for the region shown in Fig. 2a, only scenarios NH90high and P90high inundate locations with buildings. Supplementary Figs S1–S7 provide maximum inundation maps for the 9.0 MW and 8.5 MW events as well as the Chi1960high scenario.

Maximum area inundated above the spring high tide level was found to correlate well with the tsunami wave height parameters at the model boundary condition (100 m depth contour). Wave height (H) is taken here as the distance between the wave peak and trough, where Hmax represents the maximum wave height and Hrms, the generalised mean of the wave height (root mean squared) for a wave train. Of the two wave height parameters, Hmax showed the highest correlation (Fig. 2c) with R2 values of 0.99 for a second order polynomial fit for both low and high tide models. Hrms values were also closely correlated to a 2nd order polynomial fit with R2 values of 0.94 for low tide models and 0.96 for high tide models.

Maximum runup represents the maximum elevation of inundation. Figure 2d shows the maximum runup in metres above the spring high tide level for the high tide models. In order to show runup attenuation, the 80th percentile runup values  for every km were averaged and the mean was plotted against distance from the Sydney Harbour entrance. R2 values remain under 0.3 for this comparison, however the gradients of the trend lines show a clear linear relationship with Hmax at the boundary condition (R2 = 0.95). This indicates that runup values may be less predictable, however runup attenuation trends are quite clear and may be applicable at comparable sites.

The narrow isthmus in Manly was shown to be particularly vulnerable to inundation, even for scenarios where tsunami coincided with low tide. The area is exposed to the open ocean as well as the Harbour and inundates from both directions. To further investigate this inundation in more detail, a second model domain was developed to examine the P90high scenario in the Manly area with a maximum cell resolution of 2 m2. This high resolution model shows inundation across the entire isthmus (with inundation depths below 2 m), potentially isolating North Head (Fig. 3). Inundation depths of over 3 m are limited to within ~50 m of the shoreline, with depths of 2–3 m only occurring in isolated pockets. Main streets, such as Manly Corso, do not inundate beyond 1 m. Significant inundation is also shown to occur at both Manly Creek and Curl Curl Lagoon to the north of the isthmus (Fig. 3).

Maximum Current Speeds
Maximum current speeds are shown to be a significant and widely distributed hazard in the event of a tsunami in Sydney Harbour. Within the Harbour, the highest values for maximum current speeds occur in narrow, shallow, channels such as those where the Spit and Anzac Bridges are located (see Fig. 4). Areas exposed to the open ocean also show high current speeds, relative to open-channel areas that are less exposed. Figure 4a shows the maximum current speed results for P90high in their geographical context. Supplementary Figs S8–S21 show maximum current speeds for all 8.5 MW, 9.0 MW and historic scenarios modelled.

Figure 4
figure4
Map of maximum current speeds and graphs of maximum current speeds at four points of interest. (a) Sydney Harbour maximum current speed map for scenario P90high. Grid coordinates are provided in WGS84 UTM zone 56S. Image created by KMW using ESRI ArcMap 10.3.1 (http://www.esri.com/arcgis/about-arcgis) and satellite imagery from the USGS landsat collection (https://earthexplorer.usgs.gov/). (b) Maximum current speeds for all scenarios modelled at Spit Bridge (Mean Sea Level (MSL) depth = 6.1 m), (c) Maximum current speeds for all scenarios modelled at Anzac Bridge (MSL depth = 5.8 m), (d) Maximum current speeds for all scenarios modelled at Manly West (MSL depth = 9.2 m) and (e) Maximum current speeds for all scenarios modelled at Middle Harbour Entrance (MSL depth = 11.0 m). The ‘tide only’ datum refers to the maximum current speeds for models run with only January 2015 spring tides and no tsunami. The legend specifies if the scenarios were modelled as coincident with low, high or historic tides. Historic tides represent the tide data from the time that a historic tsunami event occurred.

Full size image
Spit Bridge, Anzac Bridge, Manly West, and Middle Harbour Entrance (Fig. 4) were selected as locations known to have high vessel traffic and where preliminary tsunami modelling results showed consistently high current speeds. In all four case study sites, maximum current speeds increase with increasing magnitude of the earthquake source, increasing mean wave period or increasing scenario wave heights. The rate of increase is much greater once the source magnitude of the potential events exceeds 8.0 MW for all four locations (Fig. 4b–e).

Spit Bridge and Anzac Bridge are ~6 and ~11 km upstream and have similar geomorphologies, with narrow, shallow channels that are not directly exposed to the mouth of the Harbour. Both locations showed similar patterns in flow velocities across the scenarios modelled (Fig. 4b,c). Maximum current speeds for scenarios NH85, P85, NH90, and P90 exceed 4 m/s at these two locations for both high and low tide models. Maximum current speeds for scenarios NH80, P80, Toh2011 and Chi1960 exceed 2 m/s at the Spit Bridge for both high, low and historically tided models. At the Anzac Bridge, of these smaller waves, only Chi1960low and Chi1960historic reach maximum current speeds greater than 2 m/s.

Manly West and Middle Harbour Entrance are locations in wide channels, deeper than the Spit and Anzac Bridge locations, and more exposed to the open ocean. Maximum current speeds in both of these locations remain under 1 m/s for scenarios P75, NH80, P80, Toh2011 and Chi1960 but increase to 1.8–3.9 m/s for the 8.5 MW potential scenarios. Maximum current speeds reach 4.7–8.8 m/s for the 9.0 MW potential scenarios (Fig. 4d,e).

The tide phase that the peak tsunami waves coincide with affects the maximum current speeds but not in a consistent manner. For a given earthquake scenario, current speeds were more likely to be greater when the tsunami coincided with low tide than when it coincided with high tide, though exceptions were observed. The differences between the maximum current speeds for corresponding low and high tide scenarios vary, with the greatest differences (1–1.5 m/s) occurring for scenarios NH85 and P85 for all locations except the Spit Bridge (Fig. 4b–e).

Water Depth Variation: Maximum and Minimum Depths in Locations of Interest
Maximum depths are of most concern for tsunami coincident with a high tide, and minimum depths for tsunami coincident with a low tide. The Spit Bridge, which has vessels moored near it and passing underneath it, has a clearance of ~7 m above Mean Sea Level (MSL)34 and is therefore particularly vulnerable to depth hazards. At this location, where the depth at MSL is 6.1 m, the depth range results from the tide only model show a maximum depth of 7.1 m depth at high tide and a minimum of 5.2 m at low tide. This depth range is illustrated in Fig. 5a,b. Figure 5a shows the Puysegur trench scenarios coincident with high tide and Fig. 5b the New Hebrides trench scenarios coincident with low tide.

Figure 5
figure5
Water depth time series for tsunami scenarios from the Puysegur and New Hebrides trenches at the Spit Bridge location. (a) for Puysegur scenarios coincident with high tide (b) for New Hebrides scenarios coincident with low tide. Low tide minimum and high tide maximum are the minimum and maximum depths respectively extracted from the tide only model using data from spring tides in January 2015 as specified in Methods: Tide Data. Time is relative to the beginning of boundary condition commencement.

Full size image
For tsunami coincident with a high tide, potential scenarios sourced from earthquakes >8.0 MW showed depths exceeding the modelled high tide (spring tides from January 2015) by 0.9–2.1 m, whilst those potential events of ≤8.0 MW exceeded the modelled high tide by 0.05–0.24 m. None of the scenarios modelled across high tide showed minimum depths below low tide levels (Fig. 5a). Maximum and minimum depths should also be considered with respect to wave period as, for this location, depths can range by >3 m in the space of ~30 min (Fig. 5).

For tsunami coincident with low tide, potential tsunami sourced from earthquakes >8.0 MW show minimum depths 1.8–2.2 m shallower than the modelled low tide, whilst those of <8.0 MW show depths 0.7–0.31 m shallower than low tide. Only scenario P90low showed a maximum depth value greater than the modelled high tide level, 0.06 m greater than high tide. Other locations showed a similar pattern across the events modelled, although with different depth range values.

Wave Heights
Maximum Water Level
The maximum water level above MSL that occurs across the P90high tsunami wave train is shown in Fig. 6a as a geographical distribution. Maximum water level is considered in order to show the highest water levels reached during the course of the tsunami event relative to the MSL datum. Maximum wave heights as described in Wave Heights: Maximum Wave Height, are a measure of wave magnitude that is independent of a datum and so does not provide an indicator of water level.

Figure 6
figure6
Maximum water level above MSL in Sydney Harbour. (a) Maximum water level for P90high in Sydney Harbour. The South and North Thalweg lines are shown in pink. For reference, examined locations Spit Bridge, Anzac Bridge, Manly West and Middle Harbour Entrance are shown as well as the MSL coastline (solid black line), Sydney Opera House (pink triangle) and P90high maximum inundation extent (solid grey line). Grid coordinates are provided in WGS84 UTM zone 56S. Image created by KMW using ESRI ArcMap 10.3.1 http://www.esri.com/arcgis/about-arcgis, coastline data (https://ecat.ga.gov.au/geonetwork/srv/eng/search#!a05f7892-eae3-7506-e044-00144fdd4fa6) from © Commonwealth of Australia (Geoscience Australia) 2017 and satellite imagery from the USGS landsat collection (https://earthexplorer.usgs.gov/). (b) South thalweg maximum water level shown against distance from Sydney Harbour entrance (river km). (c) North thalweg maximum water level shown against distance from Sydney Harbour entrance (river km).

Full size image
For the P90high event shown in Fig. 6a, maximum water level remains less than 3.5 m above MSL up to 10 km from the Harbour mouth, except for at the coves bordering Balmoral, Balgowlah, Manly, North Head and towards the Spit Bridge, where the maximum water level is markedly higher. The cove at Balmoral reaches maximum levels of >6 m and the cove at Balgowlah reaches >8 m. Embayments further from the mouth of the Harbour, such as those near Anzac Bridge also show higher maximum water levels than those in the main Harbour channel. This distribution pattern is consistent across the events modelled, with the smaller events showing lower absolute maximum water level values but similar overall spatial trends.

A south and a north thalweg line are mapped in Fig. 6a and the maximum water levels for all scenarios along those lines are plotted in Fig. 6b for the southern thalweg and Fig. 6c for the northern thalweg. Both figures show how a geomorphological narrowing or bottleneck can cause locally elevated water levels, most notably in Fig. 6c at 2–7 km from the Harbour entrance, on the oceanic side of the Spit Bridge location (Fig. 6c). The southern thalweg shows a similar but smaller effect 7–10 km from the Harbour entrance caused by the narrowing of the channel at Sydney Opera House (Bennelong Pt.) (Fig. 6b).

Without the dominant effects of the Spit Bridge bottleneck, the data from the southern thalweg shows that maximum water level attenuations for all scenarios follow an approximately linear trend (e.g. maximum water level attenuation for the scenario P90high is 1 m for 16.75 river km, for P85high maximum water level attenuation is 0.26 m over the same distance). The gradients of the trend lines (i.e. the rates of attenuation shown by the dotted lines in Fig. 6b) are dependent on and follow a linear correlation with Hmax values at the boundary condition (R2 = 0.96). These patterns may provide some predictive capability for maximum water level attenuation for comparable locations.

Maximum Wave Height
Maximum wave height, Hmax, differs from maximum water level, as it is a measure that extends from the peak to the trough of the largest wave in the water level time series at a particular point. This parameter is obtained from analysis of the tsunami time series at a given location and provides an indication of the depth range that would occur across a relatively short period of time.

Manly West and Middle Harbour Entrance, the two most exposed of the examined locations (see Fig. 1), show the largest Hmax values of the four example locations (Fig. 7c,d). The scenario with the largest maximum wave heights at the four case study locations is P90low, which results in Hmax = 10.3 m at Manly West and 7.4 m at Middle Harbour Entrance. Scenarios P75, NH80, P80, Toh2011 and Chi1960 all have Hmax < 1.5 m for all examined locations and for all tides modelled as shown in Fig. 7. The remaining scenarios NH85, P85 and NH90 show 1.6 < Hmax < 7.0 m when including both low and high tide models.

Figure 7
figure7
Maximum wave heights (Hmax) at the four case study locations for all modelled scenarios. (a) Spit Bridge (MSL depth = 6.1 m), (b) Anzac Bridge (MSL depth = 5.8 m), (c) Manly West (MSL depth = 9.2 m) and (d) Middle Harbour Entrance (MSL depth = 11.0 m). Note the scales on the y-axes differ between panels. The model boundary condition (i.e., the maximum wave height at the 100 m depth contour) for each scenario is shown by the ‘input’ column. See Fig. 1 for case study locations within the model domain. The legend specifies if the scenarios were modelled as coincident with low, high or historic tides. Historic tides represent the tide data from the time that a historic tsunami event occurred.

Full size image
Wave height amplification (relative to the wave height measured at the 100 m depth contour at the model boundary) is affected by tide-tsunami phasing and the degree of exposure within the estuary. The difference in wave height amplification between low and high tide models is greatest at the Spit Bridge location for scenarios NH85, P85, NH90 and P90 (Fig. 7). For example, for scenario NH90, Hmax is amplified from 1 m at the model boundary to 2.2 m in the high tide model and to 3.9 m in the low tide model. The difference in maximum wave height between low and high tide models in all other locations is relatively minor for these scenarios, with differences between Hmax at low and high tide for NH90 ranging between 0.1–0.3 m. Historic events with historic tides show amplification similar to or slightly greater than both low and high tide models, except for the Spit Bridge location, where the Hmax value is amplified from 0.4 m to 1.0 m with historic tides, only 0.55 m with a low tide, and 0.59 m with a high tide.

Model Uncertainty
To enable a degree of model validation, modelled results for both the 1960 Chile event and the 2011 Tohoku event were compared to observed residual data collected at the Fort Denison Tide Gauge (Fig. 8, Table 2). For both cases, the modelled results were found to overestimate wave heights. The sources of uncertainty are for the entire modelling process, from the rupture and deep-water propagation modelling (as extracted from T2), to the nearshore inundation modelling completed in this study. Thus, there is a wide range of potential error sources.

Figure 8
figure8
Water level time series comparing observed historical event residual data with modelled representations of historic events at the Fort Denison Tide Gauge: (a) Chile 1960 event time series (b) Tohoku 2011 event time series. Time ‘0’ represents tsunami arrival at the 100 m depth contour. See Fig. 1 for the Fort Denison Tide Gauge location.

Full size image
Table 2 Wave train parameters for both observed historical events and modelled representations of historical events.
Full size table
The observed Hmax (Hmax,obs) at the Fort Denison tide gauge during the Tohoku 2011 event was 0.2 m and the modelled Hmax (Hmax,mod) of the same event with no tide was 0.24 m, a difference of 0.04 m (ΔHmax/Hmax,obs = 20%). Modelling the same wave train with an historic tide increased Hmax,mod to 0.32 m, increasing ΔHmax to 0.12 m (ΔHmax/Hmax,obs = 60%) (Fig. 8, Table 2). Both of these ΔHmax/Hmax,obs values for Tohoku 2011 at the Fort Denison tide gauge are within the range of ΔHmax/Hmax,obs values observed by Allen & Greenslade35 with their multiple comparisons of observed DART data to the deep water modelled representation of Tohoku 2011 used in this study (0.40 ≤ Hmax,obs ≤ 1.13 m and 0.09 ≤ ΔHmax ≤ 0.22 m or 8% ≤ ΔHmax/Hmax,obs ≤ 38%)35, suggesting that the model used in this study does not increase overall uncertainty to a significant degree.

The modelled representation of the Chile 1960 event used in this study was not scaled to observed data but rather deduced from source data and some historic observations36. At the Fort Denison tide gauge Hmax,obs = 0.78 m, Hmax,mod = 0.93 m without tide and Hmax,mod = 0.94 m with an historic tide (Fig. 8). The model therefore overestimated the maximum wave height by 0.16 m or ~20%. The Hmax values for the models with and without tides for the Tohoku 2011 event differ by 0.08 m, whereas the Hmax values for the models with and without tides for the Chile 1960 event differ by 0.01 m. It should be noted that incorporating tides into these models may not have a linear effect on the residual tsunami maximum wave heights.

Discussion
This paper presents the most detailed assessment of the potential for earthquake-generated tsunami impact on Sydney Harbour to date. Such site specific modelling provides both scientists and emergency services with the most accurate estimation of tsunami impact possible. Results presented here can be used as an evidence base for both emergency planning and further research.

The tsunami threat to Sydney Harbour (Fig. 1) is primarily a marine one, with model results for all potential scenarios of 8.5 MW and greater showing high current speeds, shallow water amplification of wave heights relative to deep water wave heights, and rapid changes in water depth; all of which are potential hazards for shipping and other water users. Of the potential tsunami modelled, land inundation is only an extensive threat for tsunami generated by earthquakes of 9.0 MW (Fig. 2); although at Manly, minor inundation does occur for tsunami generated by earthquakes of 8.5 MW and greater. The vulnerability of Manly to inundation shown here (Fig. 3) corresponds to observations from previous research14,29. The degree of land inundation is shown to be tide dependent, thus the time of year (spring or neap tides) as well as tide-tsunami phasing will directly affect the inundation hazard. For Sydney Harbour, inundation tends to primarily occur along the south side of the Harbour, which has relatively low-lying and gently sloped elevation; very little inundation occurs along the north side, where there is a more steeply sloped shoreline (Fig. 2).

Maximum area of inundation across the entire model domain correlates very closely (R2 = 0.99) with Hmax and other wave height parameters (e.g. for Hrms, R2 ≥ 0.94) (Fig. 2c) indicating that wave height parameters at the 100 m depth contour can provide reliable predictive data for this location. The non-linear polynomial relationships could also be used to expand on minimal data that exists for other analogous locations. The 80th percentile runup values show a weak linear relationship with wave height parameters at the 100 m depth contour (R2 < 0.3). The gradients or attenuation rates for each scenario however, show a linear correlation to wave height parameters at the 100 depth contour (e.g. for Hmax, R2 = 0.95), indicating that overall runup attenuation rates may be predicted well, however runup values are more erratic. Runup attenuation occurs at a significantly slower rate (e.g. for the 80th percentile runup values, 1 m attenuation over 5.5 km) than previous attenuation rules developed by Leonard et al.30 in Samoa (1 m attenuation over 0.4 km up-river). Such data suggests that runup attenuation may be very site-specific and dependent on geomorphology. Runup attenuation patterns shown in this study may only be comparable for other drowned river valleys of similar dimensions.

Within the geography of the Harbour, high maximum current speeds generated by tsunami predominantly occur in locations exposed to the open ocean. However, the geomorphology of a location appears to have a greater influence on where the highest maximum current speeds occur than the degree of exposure to the open ocean (Fig. 4). For the ≥8.5 MW potential scenarios, maximum current speeds exceeded 4 m/s (as is considered destructive by NOAA37 at both the Spit and Anzac Bridges, which are locations that are somewhat protected from the tsunami but are characterised by narrow, shallow channels (Fig. 4). For the less protected and deeper locations, Middle Harbour Entrance and Manly West, maximum current speeds only exceeded 2 m/s for the low tide models (considered dangerous by NOAA37). Although the relative maximum current speeds are almost double in the narrow channels when compared to exposed but deeper locations, when combined with rapid changes in water level and wave height increases, the potential for damage is high across all of the examined locations. For the ≤8.0 MW potential scenarios, maximum current speeds are shown to be hazardous only in a few, specific locations. For example, at the Spit Bridge, results show maximum current speeds exceed 2 m/s for all scenarios except P75low.

Bystander estimates of maximum current speeds during the 1960 Chilean historic event greatly exceed all the Chi1960 results obtained by this study. Historic accounts of the 1960 Chilean event included visual estimates of current speeds of 5–15 m/s at the Spit Bridge and 4–6 m/s at Anzac Bridge15. Model results for Chi1960low, high, and historic scenarios resulted in maximum current speeds of 3.1 m/s, 2.9 m/s, and 3.1 m/s respectively at the Spit Bridge and 2.6 m/s, 1.6 m/s, and 2.6 m/s at the Anzac Bridge (Fig. 4). The discrepancy between bystander observations and model results may be due to inaccurate visual estimates or inaccuracies within the modelled scenarios; however, the comparison of modelled and observed data, which shows that the model is slightly prone to overestimation of wave heights suggests that bystander overestimation of current speeds is likely.

Amplification of deep water wave heights is greatest at the most exposed locations within the estuary. Maximum water levels are consistently highest at the most exposed bays, where there is a shallow, funnelling channel that does not allow the through flow of water (Fig. 6a). Maximum water level attenuation along the two thalwegs drawn in Fig. 6c show a sensitivity to narrowing geomorphology or bottlenecks, such as that shown by the Spit Bridge along the northern thalweg (Fig. 6a,c). In the absence of significant narrowing, maximum water level attenuation follows a linear trend, with attenuation rates for each modelled scenario correlating well with 100 m depth contour wave height parameters. Maximum water level attenuation rates are, again, significantly slower (e.g. P90high maximum water levels attenuate at a rate of 1 m per 16.75 km, P85high maximum water levels attenuate at a rate of 1 m per 64 km) than rates shown by Leonard et al.30 in Samoa (maximum water levels attenuate at a rate of 1 m per 0.4 km). Similar to runup attenuation rates, site specificity appears to be significant and detailed attention must be paid to geomorphology when considering transferring attenuation rates between sites.

Of the locations examined for maximum wave height (Hmax), the largest value exceeds 10 m at Manly West (P90low) (Fig. 7), over seven times the maximum wave height of the boundary condition. The two examined locations that are relatively protected, Spit Bridge and Anzac Bridge, show a lesser degree of wave height amplification. For the same scenario described above, P90low, both these locations experience maximum wave heights under 4 m (less than three times the boundary condition maximum wave height), indicating significant wave height attenuation occurs after the initial shoaling at the Harbour entrance.

Historic records provide an opportunity for a numerical comparison with model results to assist with quantifying the uncertainty of the model. The comparison between the observed and modelled results for the Chile 1960 and Tohoku 2011 events at the location of the Sydney Fort Denison Tide Gauge show that the model overestimates wave heights for these events (Fig. 8). The comparison between observed and modelled residual data for the Tohoku 2011 event shows ΔHmax values (without tide: ΔHmax = 0.04 m and ΔHmax/Hmax,obs = 20%; with tide: ΔHmax = 0.12 m and ΔHmax/Hmax,ob = 60% of Hmax,obs) similar to the range of ΔHmax values calculated from the modelled representation of this event and the observed DART data used for scaling (0.09 ≤ ΔHmax ≤ 0.22 m; 8% ≤ ΔHmax/Hmax,obs ≤ 38%)32. This suggests that uncertainty has not significantly increased between the DART locations and the Fort Denison tide gauge location (i.e. within the modelling presented here).

The Tohoku 2011 event modelled was scaled to several DART observations35, which was not possible with the Chile 1960 event36. The comparisons of observed data to the Tohoku 2011 and Chile 1960 modelled events are therefore not equivalent and the Tohoku 2011 comparison may be the more reliable indication of model uncertainty at the Fort Denison tide gauge. The overestimation of the Tohoku 2011 modelled event appears to be consistent across the rest of the Sydney Harbour model in this study. Model results showed impact parameters closer in severity to those of Chile 1960 than what happened historically (no dangerous conditions were reported in Sydney Harbour during the historic 2011 Tohoku event).

The modelled representation of Chile 1960 also overestimated wave heights when compared to historic observations (ΔHmax = 0.16 m; ΔHmax/Hmax,obs = 20%). Comparisons of T2 modelled data and observed DART data for the examples described in Greenslade et al.38 provide some indication of the T2 overall model uncertainty, although not specifically for the Chile source. The seven comparisons between observed DART data and modelled T2 data show a mean ΔHmax/Hmax,obs of 20%, although this comparison should consider the notably small waves (Hmax < 0.07 m; 0 ≤ ΔHmax ≤ 0.02 m)38. From the data available, it appears that model uncertainty for this study has not significantly increased from the T2 database output to the Fort Denison tide gauge.

The work of Allen & Greenslade35 at nearby Port Kembla (~75 km south of Sydney Harbour) shows model uncertainty for both the T2 deep ocean modelling and their additional nearshore modelling and so provides an overall deep ocean and nearshore modelling uncertainty comparison. The tsunami wave trains in Allen & Greenslade32 were modelled without tides. ΔHmax at the more reliable outer harbour location for the Chile source event (Chile 2010) was 0.43 m (Hmax,obs = 0.58 m; Hmax,mod = 1.01 m; ΔHmax/Hmax,obs = 73%) and for the Tohoku 2011 event (named Honshu 2011 in the study) was 0.23 m (Hmax,obs = 0.6 m, Hmax,mod = 0.83 m, ΔHmax/Hmax,obs = 38%)35,39. When compared to the two historic models without tide in this study (both Chile 1960 and Tohoku 2011 ΔHmax/Hmax,obs = 20%), the data from Allen & Greenslade38 shows a greater model overestimation of maximum wave heights.

The use of these quantitative assessments comparing observed and modelled data must take into account the different spatial scales of variability, issues may therefore have also arisen from small phase errors, which could lead to the comparison of less suitable grid points for the observations38.

Earthquake source parameters have been shown to be important for determining uncertainty in tsunami hazard. Assuming a uniform slip on the rupture interface in tsunami models, as was done for this study, can underestimate the potential impact and extent of inundation by an equivalent magnitude of about 0.3 or 0.440,41. It has been shown that simulation of an 8.7 MW earthquake with uniform slip reproduced the area that could be inundated by equivalent non uniform slip events of 8.4MW41. It follows that similar underestimations could have occurred in this study. Beyond slip uniformity, relying on one particular inversion model as a representative case has also been shown to underestimate the total tsunami hazard and potential consequences42. This variability is caused by variations in the initial ocean surface displacement, which when using MOST43,44,45 as we do, is assumed to be equal to the displacement of the seafloor. For a given rupture depth and dip, heterogeneous slip ocean surface displacements have greater amplitude and steepness, which can lead to greater tsunami inundation41,46. The volume and range of ocean displacement has also been shown to correlate with tsunami runup height47.

The elevation datasets created for this study are derived from the best data available. However, instrumentation used to collect this data contains inherent uncertainty as does the processing required to produce gridded datasets48. This uncertainty increases with depth49 but the influence of the bathymetry on the tsunami wave is greater in shallower water8. Compilation datasets such as the nearshore dataset created for this study are derived from numerous instruments, processing origins and with varying degrees of metadata. As a result, the shallow water dataset compiled for this study is unlikely to meet the criteria for an IHO Order 2 survey, which requires a maximum total vertical uncertainty of 1 m, with a 95% certainty of 0.023m49.

Spatially variable friction50 and the permeability of buildings51 are known to affect tsunami impact prediction including runup and inundation extent patterns. Experimentation by Cardno29 provides some confidence in the friction applied to this model domain, however, there is likely to be some overestimation of inundation extent for areas with buildings for the broad scale model. For the Manly model, which uses very high resolution topography that is able to resolve building structure, building permeability is likely to be the greater source of uncertainty.

Further limitations within this study include the positional data used to extract model results representing the Fort Denison Tide Gauge, which were extracted ~90 m away from the true position of the instrument. This was due to the tide gauge being enclosed and within the island domain of Fort Denison, which is above MSL in the model due to the spatial resolution of the model. Another limitation to this study and tsunami modelling as a whole is that all widely used hydrodynamic models employ a static elevation model, which does not account for sediment transport. Significant scouring was reported during the 1960 Chile event, including that which removed a large section of beach near the Spit Bridge15. Such large scale erosion would likely influence the parameters detailed in our results, however, concurrent sediment modelling was not possible to incorporate into the modelling software.

From the detailed analysis of potential tsunami impact to Sydney Harbour presented here, we conclude that for locations with similarly distanced source zones and analogous geomorphology, earthquakes of 8.5 MW and greater pose the most impactful threat, including to land at low lying elevations. Tsunami sourced from earthquakes of ≤8.0 MW are likely to cause a threat almost exclusively to marine traffic and infrastructure. We also show that inundation and maximum depth levels are a greater threat if peak tsunami waves occur at high tide. Should peak tsunami waves coincide with low tide, minimum depth levels are of concern, particularly for shallow navigation channels with limited under-keel clearance. Within the estuary, the geomorphology is shown to be a greater influence on the location of the highest maximum current speeds than the degree of exposure to the open ocean, with narrow, shallow channels or bottlenecks in the Harbour showing the greatest vulnerability even up to 11 km upstream. These bottle necks also cause elevated water levels. Maximum current speeds are more likely to be a threat for tsunami coincident with low tide but are potentially a threat for all events. Wave height increase is greatest for exposed locations but continues to be a hazard upstream as far as 11 km from the estuary mouth.

Maximum tsunami wave heights at the 100 m depth contour, which are available in the T2 database for numerous scenarios Australia wide, can be used to predict severity of impacts. Specific correlations include a second order polynomial relationship between Hmax at the 100 m depth contour and inundation area as well as linear relationships between Hmax at the 100 m depth contour and up-river attenuation rates for runup and maximum water levels.

These results and subsequent conclusions greatly contribute to the evidence base available for tsunami preparedness in NSW and, as such, are of significance to Australia’s efforts to understand this hazard. Attenuation rules and patterns provide some insight into tsunami behaviour in drowned river valley estuaries that may be applicable elsewhere. Our conclusions therefore provide further knowledge of the potential for tsunami impact in other estuaries with similar morphology and similarly distanced source zones.

Methods
The inputs required for the hydrodynamic modelling used in this study include bathymetry/topography, tsunami wave train boundary conditions, tide data and friction values. Details for these specific inputs are provided in this section. ANUGA was selected as an open source hydrodynamic model suitable for these tsunami inundation models. ANUGA uses the DE1 flow algorithm52 and has been validated and used extensively to model the hydrodynamics of tsunami53,54,55. ANUGA solves the non-linear shallow water wave equations, which have been shown to best represent tsunami behaviour44.

Bathymetry and Topography Data
Bathymetry and topography data were collected from numerous sources and in resolutions from 1–250 m. The software ESRI ArcGIS 10.1™ was used to shift or project the source data so that all data were collated at Australian Height Datum (AHD) and WGS84 UTM zone 56. The data were then gridded at 10 m, which was the highest resolution possible without eroding accuracy. For areas with data gaps, interpolation was required, using the ESRI tool, Topo to Raster. A data descriptor of this dataset with associated metadata has been published with DEM data downloadable from Pangaea56.

Resolutions within the model were selected by convergence testing for maximum accuracy of results whilst conserving computing load. Within the primary area of interest, the triangular mesh generated by ANUGA had triangles with a maximum area of 450 m2. The Manly sub model generated a triangular mesh with a maximum triangle area of 2 m2.

Tsunami Wave Train Boundary Conditions
Wave train boundary conditions were sourced from the T2 tsunami scenario database27, which was developed by the JATWC in order to facilitate nearshore tsunami modelling and improve tsunami warning capabilities. The database provides over 1,800 tsunami scenarios from global sources.

For the generation of the T2 database, rupture modelling uses a uniform slip rupture and is based on the relationship between magnitude and rupture dimensions27. The MOST model developed by Titov and Synolakis44 is used to determine seafloor deformation and therefore the initial condition for tsunami propagation. MOST assumes a double-couple source model, in which the earthquake is assumed to consist of two orthogonal shears with opposite sign43,45. For the initial condition, the initial sea surface elevation is identical to vertical seafloor displacement and the ruptures are assumed to occur instantaneously. Horizontal seafloor displacements were not used to calculate the initial conditions39,44.

The details of the tsunami wave train earthquake source zones modelled are provided in Tables 3 and 4. Table 3 provides the locations of the source zones and Table 4 provides the details of the initial conditions. Initial conditions were derived from the relationship between magnitude and rupture dimensions as described below, where magnitude (MW) is related to seismic moment (Mo) as:

MW=23(log10Mo−9.1)
(1)
and seismic moment is related to the rupture characteristics of the earthquake as:

Mo=μLWuo
(2)
where µ is the shear modulus and L, W and uo are the length, width and slip of the rupture respectively (in metres). In equation 2, µ is taken to be 4.5 × 1010 Nm−2. The rupture elements are not identical for each magnitude event as the widths and slip of the ruptures are different for each magnitude27.

Table 3 Tsunami Source Zone locations. Since initial conditions cover a large area, positions are provided as the mean latitude and longitude of the two central rupture elements used to determine initial conditions.
Full size table
Table 4 Details of the initial conditions used for the T2 scenario database.
Full size table
The two historic events modelled in this study were also generated by the MOST model with the same assumptions as the hypothetical New Hebrides and Puysegur events modelled. The Tohoku 2011 scaling was determined by deep water observations from DART57, specifically 21413, 21419, 21415, 21414 and 52402. The most suitable initial conditions (Table 4) were also chosen to best resemble the deep water observational in preference to best resembling the earthquake that took place35.

There were no deep water observations available for the Chile 1960 event. A scaling factor of 2 was used to scale the 9.0 MW initial conditions detailed in Table 4 to 9.2 MW. Although the historic event is considered to have been a 9.5 MW event58, scaling beyond 9.2 MW is not considered suitable27. Scaling this event to 9.5 MW (with a scaling factor of 5.6) was shown to overestimate impacts reported compared to those observed in Dominey-Howes11.

The scaling factor for the Chile 1960 event was derived by assuming that the only difference between the rupture of the pre-computed scenario (with magnitude M1) and the rupture of the new earthquake (with magnitude M2) was the slip27. The scaling factor, Fs, can be derived from Equations 1 and 2 27, as

Fs=1032(M2−M1)
(3)
MOST is also used to model tsunami propagation from source to location27. The horizontal grid spacing for T2 is 4 arc minutes and due to the convergence of longitude lines, this means that the actual spatial resolution ranges from ~7 km at the equator to 2.6 km at 69.4°S. Through the Courant-Friedrichs-Lewy (CFL) criterion, this 2.6 km grid size imposes a limit of 12 seconds on the time step. Within the MOST model, tsunami energy propagates freely through open boundaries with no reflection (apart from some minor numerical effects in some cases). The Antarctic ice-edge is represented as a land boundary. Model run-time for each scenario is 24 hours to ensure that reflections off underwater features or distant coasts are captured59. Bottom friction terms are not included as they are considered to be negligible in deep water25,60.

For this study, tsunami time series were extracted from the MOST model at a location along the 100 m depth contour offshore Sydney Harbour. These time series were then used as a boundary condition (at the 100 m depth contour) for the ANUGA tsunami inundation models presented in this study (Fig. 1). Scenarios selected were from the two source zones known to be the greatest threat to Sydney Harbour: the Puysegur and New Hebrides trenches33. Although it is recognised that seismic moment may be more closely correlated to tsunami intensity, earthquake source magnitude was used to select tsunami wave trains for this study. Earthquake source magnitude is the parameter used as reference by the T2 database and the JATWC27. This study aims to contribute to Australia’s national warning system and so follows the same convention. The results therefore show the hazard variables with respect to earthquake magnitude. A range of magnitudes is assessed to encompass low to high impact events. Tsunami time series scenarios 7.5, 8.0, 8.5 and 9.0 MW from the Puysegur source and 8.0, 8.5 and 9.0 MW from the New Hebrides source were extracted from T2. The 7.5 MW scenario from New Hebrides was considered too small to cause any impacts of consequence and was not included.

The range of magnitudes assessed here is supported by global studies61 with the possible exception of the Puysegur 9.0 MW event. The Puysegur subduction zone, south of New Zealand at ~600 km long62 is relatively short in length and has generally been considered unable to support a 9.0 MW earthquake, with maximum possible estimates of <8.5MW63. Recent large events however, have demonstrated that very large earthquakes can be generated with ruptures shorter than 1000 km. The Chile 2010 8.8 MW event had a rupture length of ~400 km64 and the Japan (Tohoku) 2011 9.0 MW event had a rupture length of ~300 km65. One of the consequences of the underestimation of this source zone was that numerous fatalities occurred outside the regions marked as major inundation zones in public tsunami hazard maps42. Global studies have also stated that in the context of recurrence times and our short history of observation, we cannot rule out a >9.0 MW at any subduction zones61. In the interests of providing data to support the JATWC, which has considered it necessary to include the Puysegur 9.0 MW59 event in the national database, it was deemed appropriate to model a 9.0MW event from the Puysegur subduction zone in this study.

Tide Data
Tide data used were extracted from one tidal cycle, from the spring tides of January 2015 at the Middle Harbour Tide Gauge (151°15′30.72′′, −33°49′31.56′′). The tide cycle showing the largest wave height (Hmax) of those spring tides was selected. Tide data was converted to MSL from the local datum, Zero Fort Denison. T2 data and this tide data were added together to provide dynamic tide input boundary conditions for modelling. One model was completed with only the tide input as a boundary condition for comparison and high tide level indication. The data from this tide only model, at the Middle Harbour Tide Gauge location differed from the original tide data by 0–0.07 m, a mean of 0.01 m.

The duration of the T2 tsunami scenarios varied, however the most impactful waves occurred over a 6 hour time window. The tidal period in Sydney Harbour covering both a high and low tide is approximately 12 hours and so T2 scenarios were summed so that the largest waves were coincident with both a high tide and a low tide.

Friction
For the broad scale models a Manning’s value of 0.02 was considered suitable for the model domain. Experimentation has shown this value to be applicable for seabed roughness, road surface and sand/gravel29. For the high resolution model focusing on Manly, high resolution LIDAR data was used to create a more complex elevation dataset that was detailed enough to represent buildings. This method has been shown to be an accurate way of modelling tsunami inundation in built up areas53. This is confirmed by inundation results for the Manly model showing inundation occurring along individual streets between mapped buildings.