The SW Japan arc built by subduction of the Philippine Sea (PHS) plate exhibits uneven distribution of volcanoes: thirteen Quaternary composite volcanoes form in the western half of this arc, Kyushu Island, while only two in the eastern half, Chugoku district. Reconstruction of the PHS plate back to 14 Ma, together with examinations based on thermal structure models constrained by high-density heat flow data and a petrological model for dehydration reactions suggest that fluids are discharged actively at depths of 90–100 km in the hydrous layer at the top of the old (> 50 Ma), hence, cold lithosphere sinking beneath Kyushu Island. In contrast, the young (15–25 Ma) oceanic crust downgoing beneath Chugoku district releases fluids largely at shallower depths, i.e. beneath the non-volcanic forearc, to cause characteristic tectonic tremors and low-frequency earthquakes (LFEs) and be the source of specific brine springs. Much larger amounts of fluids supplied to the magma source region in the western SW Japan arc could build more densely-distributed volcanoes.

Introduction
Subduction zone volcanoes tend to exhibit regular spacing along a volcanic arc, although the spacing of volcanoes within individual arcs is often variable from arc to arc1, 2. A broad positive correlation between the linear density of active volcanoes and the rate of plate convergence suggests that the faster subduction contributes to greater melt production in the mantle wedge3,4,5. Given that the fluids discharged from the subducted lithosphere drive magma generation, then a greater fluid flux is likely to enhance melt generation and may ultimately be linked to larger volcano numbers through increased formation rate of gravitational instabilities within the partially molten region in the mantle wedge4, 6,7,8.

In addition to the rate of subduction, the slab temperature should also impinge on volcano distribution in arcs. The contrasting volcano density observed in the Japanese Archipelago may be attributed to the difference in slab temperature: the downgoing Pacific plate beneath NE Japan where active volcanoes are densely distributed is much older (ca. 200 my) and cooler than the PHS plate beneath SW Japan9. The abundant arc volcanism in NE Japan reflects partial melting in the overlying mantle wedge, triggered by active infiltration of slab-derived fluids, while most of the water in the warm PHS plate is driven off at shallow depths and is not available to trigger effective magma production in the mantle wedge beneath SW Japan9. This pioneering work estimated thermal structure of the PHS plate beneath the eastern part of SW Japan, the Chugoku district, where active volcanoes are sparsely distributed (Fig. 1). The western part of SW Japan, the Kyushu region is, on the other hand, a volcanic arc exhibiting higher linear density of active volcanoes, in marked contrast to the Chugoku region of this arc, although both regions are underlain by the lithosphere of the PHS plate (Fig. 1). It should be here stressed, however, that the age of the PHS plate differs contrastingly, 25–15 vs. ~ 50 my for lithospheres of the western eastern part of the PHS plate, respectively10,11,12; the Kyushu-Palau Ridge (KPR) forms the boundary between these young and old lithospheres (Fig. 1). The difference in age hence temperature of the subducting slab could cause the contrasting volcano spacing along the SW Japan arc. Herein this hypothesis will be discussed based on the age of the subducted PHS plate inferred by reconstruction of plate motion, and calculation of temperature distribution along the sinking PHS plate beneath the Chugoku and Kyushu regions, and the behavior of water during subduction of the PHS plate.

Figure 1
figure1
Tectonic setting of the western part of the Japanese Archipelago, which is an orogenic belt activated by subduction of both the Pacific (PAC) and the Philippine Sea (PHS) plates beneath the Eurasian (EUR) plate building active volcanoes on the NE Japan and Izu-Bonin-Mariana (purple triangles) and the SW Japan arcs (white triangles), respectively. Quaternary volcanoes in the SW Japan arc are also shown by red circles. The thin and solid continuous lines denote depth contours to the top of the subducted PHS slab estimated based on the seismicity in the PHS slab and local-earthquake tomography14 and the broken lines show those estimated based on the teleseismic tomography14. Blue circles and a green belt indicate distributions of high Li/Cl brine springs and a LFE zone21, respectively. The thermal structures were estimated along the profiles A and B.

Full size image
Tectonic setting of the SW Japan arc
The PHS plate is being subducted beneath the Eurasian (or Amurian) plate along the Nankai Trough and the Ryukyu Trench at a rate of 40–70 mm/year13, in the northwest direction to form the SW Japan arc (Fig. 1). Earthquakes in the PHS slab take place actively down to a depth of ∼ 150 km under Kyushu Island and ∼ 80 km beneath the Chugoku region14 (Fig. 1). The PHS slab has been further sinking aseismically down to a depth of ∼ 400 km15, 16 (Fig. 1). Tectonic tremors and LFEs, which may be caused by fluid activity associated with dehydration of the downgoing slab17, 18, have been identified beneath the non-volcanic forearc along the surface of the subducted PHS slab at depths of approximately 30–40 km with a belt-like along-arc distribution (Fig. 1). LFEs occur in high VP/VS areas, indicating the existence of fluid, near the plate boundary between the down-dip end of the locked seismogenic zone of megathrust earthquakes and the up-dip end of the stable sliding region in western Shikoku19.

Active arc volcanoes that are composed of lavas and volcaniclastics having the calc-alkaline signatures form 100–200 km above the top of sinking PHS plate in SW Japan, though the volcano density changes markedly between the Kyushu and the Chugoku segments (Fig. 1).

In the non-volcanic forearc of the eastern half of this arc spring out characteristic deep-seated fluids referred to as the Arima-type brines (Fig. 1) possessing high Cl contents, high Li/Cl ratios, specific δ18O–δD isotopic ratios, and high 3He/4He ratios20, 21. Such geochemical characteristics of these brines may be attributed to dehydration of the downgoing PHS oceanic crust21,22,23,24.

The Japan Sea behind the SW and NE Japan arcs (Fig. 1) is a backarc basin created 30 to 15 Ma by rifting of the eastern margin of the Asian continent25. The opening of this backarc basin caused clockwise and counterclockwise rotations of the SW and NE Japan arc slivers, respectively, at ∼ 15 Ma26.

South of SW Japan is the Shikoku Basin (Fig. 1), which is also a backarc basin that formed behind the Izu-Bonin-Mariana arc by rifting 25 to 15 Ma10. Through this backarc rifting, the Izu-Bonin-Mariana arc sliver was separated from the paleo-Kyushu-Palau arc and migrated eastward, creating a new oceanic crust of the Shikoku Basin. It is thus inferred that the southward drift of the SW Japan arc, in association with both the Japan Sea opening and the clockwise rotation of the arc sliver, resulted in enforced subduction of the young (< 15 my) hence warm oceanic lithosphere of the Shikoku Basin beneath the eastern half of the SW Japan arc. The Amami-Sankaku Basin behind the KPR on the PHS plate (Fig. 1) was born > 48.7 Ma by backarc spreading within a Cretaceous-age island arc system11, 12 and is being subducted beneath the southern part of the SW Japan arc at a rate of > 65 mm/years (Fig. 1). It should be again noted that the age of the PHS plate changes greatly, 25–15 vs. ~ 50 my, across the KPR10,11,12.

Results and discussions
Volcano distribution in the SW Japan arc
Contrasting active volcano spacing is a characteristic in the SW Japan arc (Fig. 1). Identification of volcano spacing based solely on active Holocene volcanoes, however, may mislead the time scale of dynamic processes operating in the subarc mantle. The reasons for believing so are twofold. Firstly, although mafic melts can get transferred from source in the mantle wedge to surface rapidly, possibly within less than ~ 1 ky, magmatic differentiation from basalt to evolved andesite magmas that are the major volcanic products at convergent margins may need much longer time, i.e., > 100 ky27. Secondly, large volcanoes in the Japanese Archipelago (> 40 km3) have continued activity for 400–1,300 ky28, suggesting that the life span of arc composite volcanoes may be several hundreds of kilo years. In order to examine the linkage between plate subduction and volcano formation, therefore, distribution of Quaternary volcanoes in the SW Japan, rather than that of active Holocene volcanoes, should be examined, because these volcanoes may be built by current motion of the PHS plate that have been constant since 3 Ma as described later. Figure 1 clearly exhibits that Quaternary volcanoes are much more densely built in the eastern half of this arc, although only two active volcanoes exist there.

Figure 2 shows the along-arc distribution of Quaternary volcanoes and the volume of each volcano. It should be stressed in this diagram that most Quaternary volcanoes in the Chugoku region are small and form monogenetic volcanoes31, 32. As a result of this, total volume of volcanics distributed in the Kyushu region is ~ 7 times larger than in the Chugoku district. Furthermore, the number of large volcanoes (> 20 km3) is thirteen in Kyushu with an average spacing of ~ 90 km, whereas only two in Chugoku (~ 500 km spacing). It may be thus confirmed that the contrasting volcano spacing in the SW Japan arc during Holocene has been continued from 2.6 Ma.

Figure 2
figure2
The volume and location of Quaternary volcanoes along the SW Japan arc from Kaimon volcano at the southern tip of Kyushu Island29. Contrasting volcano spacing and volume of volcanics are observed for Kyushu and Chugoku regions. In case that volcanoes form behind the volcanic front in the Kyushu region, the locations of such volcanoes are projected onto the volcanic front. In this diagram, volcanoes along the northern margin and on islands to the north and west of Kyushu Island are not included, because they are composed of alkaline basalts and may not be produced in association with subduction of the PHS plate. Some volcanoes in the SW Japan arc such as Aira and Aso volcanoes in Kyushu and Daisen in Chugoku erupted large amounts of felsic ignimbrites and/or tephra. These voluminous felsic magmas are not considered in this figure, since they may be produced by anatexis of the crust, not by differentiation of mantle-derived magmas30.

Full size image
There certainly is a gap in Holocene volcanism along the volcanic front in central to southern Kyushu Island (Fig. 1). Analyses based on receiver function33 suggested that this volcanic gap may be caused by migration of slab-derived fluids back to the forearc mantle wedge along the surface of the slab to form low-velocity, possibly serpentinized mantle. As indicated in Fig. 2, however, the volcanic gap may not be so clearly observed when reararc volcanos are included, suggesting the contribution of slab-derived fluids to arc magmatism even in this region. Further detailed analyses may be required for better understanding the cause of the volcanic gap along the volcanic front of central Kyushu.

Figure 2 together with the above considerations then confirm that a larger number of volcanoes and the greater volume of mantle-derived magmas have formed in the Kyushu segment than in the Chugoku region. This observation may intuitively lead to the conclusion that the older and cooler PHS plate to the west of the KPR (> 50 my) is being subducted beneath the Kyushu region, whereas the younger and warmer PHS plate beneath the Chugoku region releases the water at shallow depths and cannot cause effective magma production in the mantle wedge. However, this simple mechanism could not be applied, since the boundary between the older and younger PHS plate, i.e., the KPR is currently located beneath the southern part of Kyushu Island (Fig. 1).

Paleo-position of Kyushu-Palau Ridge (KPR): contrasting age of subducting Philippine sea plate
The northern tip of the KPR, a remnant conjugate arc of the active Izu-Bonin-Mariana arc system, is located presently at the junction of the Nankai Trough and the Ryukyu Trench and is sinking beneath Kyushu Island (Figs. 1 and 3). The KPR plays a key role in the volcano-tectonic evolution of the SW Japan arc, as this forms a boundary between a younger (< 25 Ma) and an older (> 50 Ma) oceanic lithosphere and is composed of buoyant arc crust with the middle crust exhibiting seismic velocity similar to that of the bulk continental crust34.

Figure 3
figure3
Positions of the Kyushu-Palau Ridge (KPR) at present, 3, and 14 Ma arranged by subduction of the PHS plate shown by arrows. Red triangles, active volcanoes; green and yellow stars, Setouchi and near trench felsic volcano-plutonic complexes occurred 13–14 Ma. The cool and warm lithospheres bordered by the KPR underlay Kyushu and Chugoku at 3 Ma, respectively.

Full size image
Although it has been accepted generally that the subduction direction of the PHS plate changed from NNW to NW35, the timing of this change has been controversial. Geological and structural evolution of strata deposited in the forearc basin of at the eastern margin of the PHS subduction system, however, has led to the conclusion that it took place at 3 Ma and caused the stress change both in the NE and SW Japan arcs36, 37. If so, then the paleo-position of the KPR at 3 Ma could be reconstructed based on the current motion of the PHS plate (Fig. 3); the KPR was situated beneath the northeastern edge of Kyushu Island at 3 Ma. It is thus suggested that a > 50 Ma cool plate has distributed beneath the Kyushu region, whereas a warm lithosphere of the Shikoku Basin beneath the Chugoku region in SW Japan.

Characteristic volcanic rocks including mantle-derived high-Mg andesites erupted sporadically at 13–14 Ma and formed the Setouchi volcanic belt in the present forearc (Fig. 3), extending for ∼ 600 km with five major volcanic regions38. Synchronously with this magmatism, formed felsic volcano-plutonic complexes at 14 Ma39, 40 in the near-trench region of SW Japan (Fig. 3). If the dip angle of subduction has been unchanged for the last 14 my, the slab depth beneath these forearc or near trench magmatic belts would have been < 50 km, much shallower than that beneath most arc volcanic chains (110–170 km)4. Magma generation above such a shallow slab would require some additional conditions such as unusually high temperatures in the sinking lithosphere that could trigger slab melting and subsequent melt-mantle interaction41. This mechanism would be consistent with subduction of a newly-born lithosphere of the Shikoku Basin enforced by southward migration of the SW Japan arc sliver in association with opening of the Japan Sea41. If so, then the distribution of 13–14 Ma forearc magmatism in SW Japan could provide a constraint on the location of the KPR at that time; to the south of Yaku-Shima Island (Fig. 3). The rate of northward subduction of the PHS from 14 to 3 Ma can be then calculated as 77 mm/years, almost identical to the previous estimation42.

Thermal structure and dehydration of the subducted PHS plate: contributions to arc magmatism
To understand migration of aqueous fluids associated with subduction of the young vs. old PHS plates and its role in causing contrasting volcano spacing in the Kyushu and Chugoku regions of the SW Japan arc, the thermal structures beneath two regions were estimated by 2D thermal structure models (Figs. S1, S4 and S6). Two end-member models are here constructed: One is a simple model (MODEL I) with constant slab age and subduction velocity (Figs. S2 and S3), and the other is a rather complex and positively close-to-reality model (MODEL II) that takes into account of the history of the subducted Philippine Sea plate and fits heat flow data best (Figs. S2, S3 and S5). In comparison to 2D models for these regions reported so far43,44,45,46,47, our thermal modeling has the following two advantages: (1) various heat sources were considered in the energy equation and (2) highly densely distributed heat flow data were used to constrain thermal structures and to estimate optimal values of model parameters in MODEL II (Fig. S5). Details of modeling are described in “Methods” and Supplementary Information (SI). Although 3D thermal modeling may provide new insights into the thermal evolution of a tectonically complex region such as SW Japan48, 49, we here adopted 2D, rather than 3D thermal models, as several hundreds of different values of model parameters with high spatial resolution must be tested to obtain high-resolution thermal structure suitable for examining the behavior of water in the subducted slab and the mantle wedge.

The calculated pressure–temperature (P–T) paths near to the surface of the PHS plate along the two profiles by MODEL I are shown in Fig. S4, together with H2O contents in the subducted oceanic crust and the downgoing peridotite under H2O-excess conditions calculated by Perple_X50 for a Shikoku Basin basalt and a peridotite (Table S2). It is indicated that temperatures in the two regions increase remarkably at a depth of ~ 40 km because this model does not incorporate a possible decoupling depth. As discussed later, an important point is that temperature along profile B (Chugoku) is much higher than that along profile A (Kyushu) mostly due to the age difference between them.

In MODEL II, we examined two possibly most preferable models among several hundreds of models with different values of model parameters in terms of the least square sense of the observed heat flow data along profiles A and B (Fig. S5b,c): One is the cold forearc model (MODEL II-1) incorporating decoupling to depths of 60 ~ 70 km, which has been suggested by previous works43, 44, 47, and the other is the hot mantle wedge corner model (MODEL II-2), which exhibits a remarkable temperature increase around a depth of 40 km along the plate interface as obtained by MODEL-I (Fig. S4). However, it is difficult to identify which model is better, because the difference in heat flow calculated for these two models is small and these heat flow values are largely consistent with the observed heat flow data. Further considerations on these two models are presented in the section “Possible decoupling depths” in SI. The estimated most suitable values of the model parameters for the cold forearc model along the two profiles are tabulated in Table S1.

Although three models, MODELs I, II-1, and II-2, provide different P–T profiles along the subducting crust (Fig. S4), all these models suggest commonly that slab temperatures along profile B is much higher than that along profile A mostly due to the age difference in the two regions. The behavior of H2O along with subduction of the PHS plate shall thus be examined based on the positively close-to-reality end-member model (MODEL II-1). It should be stressed, on the other hand, that discussions based on other models (MODELs I and II-2) reach to the conclusion on the cause of the contrasting volcano spacing in the Kyushu and Chugoku regions exactly the same as that based on the MODEL II-1.

The present result for the Chugoku profile confirms the previous suggestion9, 43 that the oceanic crust sinking beneath this region is warm and most of the water in the oceanic crust is driven off at shallow depths not to trigger partial melting of the mantle wedge directly and may further provide insights into migration of fluids and its role in characteristic fluid-related activities in this subduction zone. One is the occurrence of tectonic tremors and LFEs17, 18, 43, 51, 52 taking place at ~ 30 km depths (Fig. 1). The major dehydration reaction in the subducted PHS oceanic crust corresponding to the transition to amphibolite facies takes place 20–40 km depths (Figs. 4 and 5) and triggers characteristic tectonic tremors and LFEs. The other distinctive subduction-related fluid activity in this region is the occurrence of deep-seated fluids exhibiting characteristic chemistry and often high temperature. Water discharged from the PHS crust migrates upwards to form hydrous peridotites at the base of the forearc mantle wedge, in which serpentine, chlorite and pargasitic amphibole may crystallize as major hydrous phases (Figs. 4 and 5). The hydrous peridotites are likely to be dragged downwards on the slab as a consequence of subduction of a rigid oceanic lithosphere into the viscous mantle, to supply aqueous fluids to the overlying dry mantle wedge6. Figure 4 also demonstrates that dehydration of serpentine and chlorite at the base of the hydrous peridotite layer occur, i.e., immediately above the slab surface, at ~ 40 km to release large amounts of water, which would be the source of characteristic deep-seated fluids referred to as the Arima-type brines (Figs. 1 and 5) as advocated geochemically21,22,23, 41.

Figure 4
figure4
The calculated temperature distributions at the surface of the PHS plate along the profiles A and B passing through Kyushu and Chugoku districts, respectively for MODEL II-1 (Fig. 1). The metamorphic facies for the basaltic system, the stability limits of hydrous phases in the peridotite system, i.e., serpentine, chlorite, and amphibole, and H2O contents are also shown. GS green schist, EA epidote amphibolite, BS blue schist, AMP amphibolite, GR granulite, AmpEC amphibole eclogite, ZoEC zoisite eclogite, LwsEC lawsonite eclogite, DryEC dry eclogite.

Full size image
Figure 5
figure5
Dehydration and fluid release taking place along the subducted PHS plate beneath Kyushu (a) and Chugoku (b) for MODEL II-1. Higher water flux beneath Kyushu contributes to dense volcanism, while lower water flux caused by major dehydration reactions at a depth of ~ 50 km beneath Shikoku could not produce magmas actively to build a sparely-distributed volcanoes.

Full size image
Amphibole is then a hydrous phase in the down-dragged hydrous layer on the PHS plate that could transport water to deeper levels and decompose at a depth of ~ 90 km to release aqueous fluids (Fig. 4). This depth corresponds to the top of the PHS plate immediately beneath the active Sanbe volcano and other Quaternary volcanoes (Fig. 1). The Sanbe volcano is known by the occurrence of adakites exhibiting anomalously high Sr/Y ratios, leading to the conclusion that partial melting of the eclogitic PHS crust to cause magmatism9, 53. However, geochemical examination of adakites from this volcano and the surrounding suggests that these adakitic magmas are produced by melting of the lower crust, not of the subducted oceanic crust, in the presence of garnet, plagioclase, and amphibole54,55,56. It should be thus stressed that the amount of water supplied through amphibole dehydration in the down-dragged hydrous layer to cause arc magma production is much smaller than that in the original hydrous peridotites including serpentine and chlorite.

In contrast to the Chugoku region of SW Japan, the subducted PHS crust beneath the Kyushu region is much older (Fig. 3) and hence much cooler (Fig. 4). Providing that near the surface of the oceanic crust is significantly hydrated, then the subducting slab may largely dehydrate at 50 ~ 80 km depths (Fig. 4). In contrast, the hydrous layer at the base of the mantle wedge, i.e., immediately above the slab surface, enables to transport of a large amount of water to deep levels; chlorite and amphibole decompose to release water at depths of ~ 100 km (Fig. 4), causing much higher rates of melt production and consequently building more densely distributed volcanoes than a warmer thermal regime such as the Chugoku profile (Fig. 5).

It has been observed that hydration of mantle portion of the oceanic plate may occur at least in some outer-rise regions through bending-related faulting prior to subduction57, 58. The Pacific plate being subducted at the Japan Trench, for example, the presence of ~ 2 wt% H2O in the uppermost mantle immediately below the Moho could account for the observed seismic velocity reduction58. If this is the case for the subducting PHS plate, then slab-mantle-derived water may contribute further to magma generation in both the Kyushu and Chugoku regions as serpentine or chlorite decomposes to release H2O beneath the volcanic chains (mantle temperature profiles at 5 km below slab surface in Fig. 4). Even if this is the case, then the contribution of serpentine dehydration to magma generation may be inferred beneath the Kyushu, not Chugoku region.

The PHS plate is sinking normally along the Ryukyu Trench at the rate of > 63 mm/years, whereas obliquely along the Nankai Trough at the rate of 61 mm/years with a substantial trench-normal component of ~ 55 mm/years. The effective rate of subduction of the PHS plate is higher in the Kyushu than Chugoku regions. This may enhance the contrasting volcano distribution along the SW Japan arc, as higher rates of subduction tends to cause higher rates of magma production in the mantle wedge3,4,5.

Concluding remarks
Quaternary volcanoes are distributed much more densely in the Kyushu than in the Chugoku segment along the SW Japan arc, although the PHS plate is currently being subducted beneath this arc. Tectonic reconstruction of the PHS plate that changed its direction of motion from NNE to NW at 3 Ma suggests an older (> 50 Ma) portion of the PHS oceanic crust with high dip angle has downgone beneath the Kyushu region, whereas the young (25–15 Ma) lithosphere of the Shikoku Basin with low dip angle in the forearc region of the Chugoku segment of the SW Japan arc. Geothermal calculations of the temperature distribution along the subducting PHS plate with different ages, together with petrological constraints on dehydration reactions taking place within both the downgoing crust and the overlying mantle wedge, demonstrate that much larger amounts of fluids are supplied to the magma source region beneath the Kyushu than the Chugoku regions, causing much higher density in volcano distribution in Kyushu. Water that are released from the young PHS plate beneath the forearc of the Chugoku region may cause characteristic tectonic tremors and LFEs, and be the source of brain springs.

Methods
The calculation of 2D thermal structures in this study follows the previous models47, 51, 52. The momentum and energy equations were solved as a coupled problem, using the finite difference method. The model is a time-dependent, and considered possible heat sources such as viscous dissipation, adiabatic compression, frictional heating on the plate interface and temperature change caused by erosion and sedimentation during the Quaternary period in the energy equation. Viscosity is represented by a composite of diffusion creep and dislocation creep59, and the density depends solely on the temperature.

The present model setting is shown schematically in Fig. S1. The 2D box-type model has a horizontal length of 800 km and a depth of 400 km. Both the upper and lower crusts were set as conductive layers with respective thickness of 16 km. The accretionary prism was also incorporated into the model as a conductive layer. The thickness of the PHS plate at the Nankai Trough at the right model boundary is given based on the equation related to the age of the ocean floor60. The initial flow and temperature conditions for the model include no mantle flow and the half-space cooling with adiabatic compression at depths deeper than 50 km. As the boundary condition for flow fields, the normal stress is set to zero for the left, right, and bottom boundaries. As the boundary condition for temperature field, the model surface is set to 0 °C. Adiabatic conditions are assumed for the left and bottom boundaries. Geometry models of the PHS slab were taken14, 15, 61. The PHS plate is assumed to subduct along a prescribed guide62 whose length gradually extends from the right boundary from 14 Ma. Grid sizes for stream functions and temperatures are 4 × 4 km and 2 × 2 km, respectively, and the stream function is evaluated at the same grid spacing as the temperature field via the third-order Spline interpolation. Remeshing with 1 km for the mantle wedge corner, where intense flow is expected to occur, is performed at each time step63, 64.

For a simple model (MODEL I), we gave constant age of 50 my and constant velocity of 64 mm/years for the subducting PHS plate along profile A, whereas those of 17 my and 44 mm/years along profile B throughout the calculated period of 14 my (Figs. S2 and S3). We did not use heat flow data, and a decoupling depth is not incorporated into the model.

On the other hand, for a rather complex and positively close-to-reality model (MODELs II-1 and II-2), the depth and age dependent temperature distribution determined by the plate cooling model RT165 is imposed at the right boundary. Time-dependent age and subduction velocity along profiles A and B were given, following the assumed subduction history (Figs. 1, 4, S2 and S3). For MODELs II-1 and II-2, we also used heat flow data from high-quality high-density Hi-net borehole and BSRs, which have not been used except for studies of our group46, 47, 51, 52, in addition to previously-used land boreholes and marine heat probes, resulting in the high-density heat flow data (Fig. S5a) to constrain the thermal structures along the profiles passing through Kyushu and Chugoku regions. This enables us to estimate thermal structures with high spatial resolution from shallow to deeper portions in association with subduction of the PHS plate. We correctly picked up only data along the two profiles within one-sided width of 30 km (Fig. S5b,c), Tables S2 and S4), and estimated optimal thermal models in which the calculated heat flow fits best with the observed values by least square method. It should be noted that spatial distributions of the observed densely-distributed heat flow along the two profiles obtained in this study are rather different from those of previous studies44; Shorter wavelength patterns can be identified, which should be explained by introducing heat sources such as temperature change caused by erosion and sedimentation during the Quaternary period46. To better reproduce the observed heat flow data along the two profiles, pore pressure ratio on the plate interface, radioactive heating per unit volume in the accretionary prism, initial age of the PHS plate at the Nankai Trough, age discontinuity passing through the KPR, depth range and thickness of a low-viscosity layer attached on the plate interface, and its viscosity contrast against the surrounding region are assumed to be unknown free parameters (Table S1). Then, we performed grid search for several hundreds of different values of such free parameters for the respective profiles. Other details of the thermal modeling are described elsewhere

Continued post-collapse volcanic activity can cause the rise of a new edifice. However, details of such edifice rebirth have not been documented yet. Here, we present 7-decade-long photogrammetric data for Bezymianny volcano, Kamchatka, showing its evolution after the 1956 sector collapse. Edifice rebirth started with two lava domes originating at distinct vents ~400 m apart. After 2 decades, activity became more effusive with vents migrating within ~200 m distance. After 5 decades, the activity focused on a single vent to develop a stratocone with a summit crater. We determine a long-term average growth rate of 26,400 m3/day, allowing us to estimate the regain of the pre-collapse size within the next 15 years. Numerical modeling explains the gradual vents focusing to be associated with loading changes, affecting magma pathways at depth. This work thus sheds light on the complex regrowth process following a sector collapse, with implications for regrowing volcanoes elsewhere.

Introduction
Active volcanoes are subject to flank instability that may cause large-scale sector collapses1. The collapses may occur slowly and creep-like2 or fast and catastrophic3, some with precursory eruptive activity4 and others without any apparent change in behavior5. The volumes mobilized by sector collapses vary considerably, from small scale6 to large edifice collapses involving 108−1011 m3 7, with the larger collapses being rarer8. The consequences of sector collapses are often dramatic and associated with catastrophic directed blasts and pyroclastic flows, devastation over distances as far as tens of kilometers, and potential for triggering far-reaching secondary hazards such as lahars and tsunamis, with an estimated 20,000 death toll caused by historic volcano flank collapses and associated hazards9. The mobilization of large rock masses at the surface is felt beneath the volcano: at depth, unloading forces cause changes in magma reservoir pressure10, its location and geometry11, and are associated with compositional changes of the erupted products12. Simulations of magma paths following a sector collapse suggest that they may deflect13 and bifurcate from their pre-collapse course14, leading to a relocation of the eruption site(s). At the surface, following a collapse the regrowth of a new volcanic cone was observed at Mount St. Helens (USA)15, Soufriere Hills (Montserrat)16, Santa Maria (Guatemala)17, Ritter Island (Papua New Guinea)18, Shiveluch (Russia)19, and Bezymianny (Russia)20, and was geologically and experimentally reconstructed21 for pre-historic collapse events such as evidenced at Socompa (Argentina and Chile)22, Parinacota (Chile and Bolivia)23, Vesuvius (Italy)24, and Tungurahua (Ecuador)25. To our knowledge, the Bezymianny case presented here, however, is providing the first detailed chronological evolution of a rebuilding cone morphology. The rebuilding of a new cone may continue until another sector collapse occurs, with similar direction, dimension, and effects21,26.

Volcanic sector collapse and regrowth are recurrent and geologically inferred at volcanoes worldwide, e.g., by structural, geologic, and stratigraphic analysis27. Changes in the direction of feeding magma paths may favor repeated collapses, and a possible feedback mechanism between magmatic activity and topographic changes may be given13. The pathways of magma may adjust as a result of the stress field redistribution owing to sudden topographic changes13,14, causing a shift of the eruption locations and their pattern28. However, detailed observations of shifting and then gradually focusing vents at active volcanoes have not been documented, so far. Worldwide there are only a few cases where cone regrowth after sector collapse had been continuously monitored over decades so that direct observations of geomorphologic and structural changes are limited.

After a sector collapse, the regrowth of the volcanic edifice may start immediately or with a delay and, with few exceptions29, commonly nucleates in the center of the newly exposed amphitheater. Regrowth may last days to years, as particularly observed at Mount St. Helens in the 1980s30 and 2000s31. Despite the episodic growth nature, long-term regrowth is assumed to be rather regular, forming characteristic dome height-to-width ratios of 0.2–0.330. To study the topographic evolution of a central cone regrowing after a sector collapse, continuous long-term observations are therefore required.

Bezymianny volcano (see Fig. 1a, b), which is one of the most active andesitic volcanoes in the world33, experienced a sector collapse in 195632. Before the collapse, Bezymianny was a conically shaped stratovolcano that reached an elevation of 3113 m similar to that of today (Fig. 1c, f). The collapse removed over 0.7 km3 of material from the former edifice34 and led to a catastrophic eastward directed blast eruption32 (Fig. 1d). Immediately after this climactic episode, construction processes commenced inside the collapse amphitheater20,35 and continued until today (Fig. 1e, f). The dome growth style was characterized as extrusive–explosive until 1977, when it changed to extrusive–explosive–effusive36. This transition was accompanied by a gradual change in rock chemistry. In fact, comprehensive petrographic analysis37 showed that Bezymianny’s eruptive products became continuously more mafic since 1956.

Fig. 1: Bezymianny volcano and photo documentation of the edifice before, during, and after the 1956 sector collapse.
figure1
a Location of Bezymianny volcano in the Kluchevskaya volcanic group; inset shows the location in the Kamchatka Peninsula. b Shaded relief map of Bezymianny. c State of Bezymianny in 1909 showing the scar of an earlier, albeit smaller collapse. d The 30.03.1956 eruption. e Bezymianny in August 1956. f Bezymianny on 13.04.2019. c, e, f views from the southeast. d view from the west. Map data: a 2018 ArcticDEM digital elevation model (https://www.pgc.umn.edu/data/arcticdem/), b 2017 Pleiades digital elevation model. Photos: c by N. G. Kell, d by I. V. Yerov, e by G. S. Gorshkov, and f by Yu. V. Demyanchuk.

Full size image
Here, we employ a unique photogrammetric data set38 that allows an unprecedented study of the surface changes associated with a seven-decade-long period of the post-collapse edifice regrowth at Bezymianny. With high-resolution digital elevation models (DEMs) we illuminate the morphological and structural evolution of the edifice, and that volcanic activity changed progressively from destructive to constructive processes, which eventually led to the transition from a lava dome into a stratocone with a centralized vent. Ultimately, we make use of a numerical model to show how the sector collapse caused a shift in eruption center location and the edifice regrowth promoted consecutive vents centralization.

Results
Evolution after sector collapse
The first aerial survey (Supplementary Fig. 1) from 1949 depicts the pre-collapse topography of Bezymianny volcano and reveals two collapse scars that are related to Holocene activity34,39 (Fig. 1c, Supplementary Fig. 2).

The processed data of the first post-collapse aerial survey from 1967 shows the presence of a steep headwall amphitheater (1300 m in width, 2700 m in axial length, and up to 400 m in visible depth) facing ESE. Within the amphitheater, scattered volcanic activity (see section “Vents migration and focusing”) formed a broad NW–SE elongated edifice (azimuth 120°) that was formed between 1956 and 196735,40,41,42. This new edifice is separated by a NE–SW linear depression (azimuth 50°), 200 m wide and 110 m deep, that delineates two consecutive endogenous43 domes located in the southeast (1st) and northwest (2nd) of the amphitheater, and that coalesced through time35,41 (Fig. 2a, Fig. 3a, b) (see section “Morphological mapping” in “Methods”). The base of this dome complex covered an area of 1975 km2, the dome reached an elevation of 2801 m (~600 m in relative height) and occupied a volume of 0.239 km334. The resulting average growth rate between 1956 and 1967 was 56,600 m3/day. Moreover, the 1967 survey revealed a shear lobe (i.e., a portion of highly viscous lava43) that extruded from an open crater at the summit of the north-western dome that indicates a transition to exogenous growth43 at Bezymianny. The comparison of the 1967 and 1968 aerial images shows that the lobe increased from 220 m to 380 m in diameter and from 70 m to 110 m in thickness (Fig. 2b, Fig. 3c, d). This lobe was described by eyewitnesses and named “Nautilus”41. Overall, the lobe might resemble the “whaleback” spine that extruded 2.5 decades after the 1980 sector collapse at Mount St. Helens31. The calculated differential volume between 1967 and 1968 is 0.014 km3, resulting in a derived average extrusion rate of 43,600 m3/day (see further morphometric characteristics in Table 1, Supplementary Fig. 3; see errors in Supplementary Table 1).

Fig. 2: Gradual refilling of the collapse amphitheater and edifice evolution at Bezymianny between 1967 and 2017.
figure2
Oblique (view from SSE) hillshade visualizations of DEMs of Bezymianny volcano at different stages of the post-collapse regrowth. a Transition from endogenous to exogenous dome growth. b, c Exogenous (extrusive) dome growth. d–f Exogenous (extrusive–effusive) dome growth. g–i Stratocone formation. Major structures are provided by dotted lines (domes, shear lobes, flows) and dashed lines (craters). DEMs were generated by photogrammetric processing of aerial and satellite images.

Full size image
Fig. 3: Exogenous (extrusive) dome growth in 1967–1976.
figure3
Aerial orthophotos a, c, e and derived hillshade maps b, d, f show that viscous shear lobes extrude from multiple open craters and pile up at different sectors of the previously formed endogenous domes.

Full size image
Table 1 Bezymianny dome parameters.
Full size table
The subsequent aerial data from the 1976 survey revealed that new shear lobes piled up at the south-eastern sector of the dome complex (Fig. 2c, Fig. 3e, f) suggesting that the growth dynamics has not changed significantly since 1967. Two open craters at the top of these lobes indicate that explosive activity increased. The oldest of the lobes (“Oktyabr”) formed between 1969 and 197341, had a thickness of 60 m, and an average diameter of ~450 m. The latest of them, a 70-m-thick lobe, emerged from the youngest crater, covered an area of 150 × 300 m, and was bisected by a 190-m-long crease structure (i.e., negative “crack-like” topographic feature of silicic domes44).

In 1977, a new, up to 180 m wide and 300 m long, portion of lava poured out onto the north-eastern flank of the dome complex (Fig. 2d and Fig. 4a, b). In contrast to previously observed shear lobes, it was much thinner (15 m), and flowed over a comparatively longer distance toward the foot of the dome. Therefore, we can consider it as a first post-collapse lava flow at Bezymianny, which is also in agreement with eyewitness accounts36. We link the different characteristics of shear lobes and lava flows with two distinct exogenous growth modes: extrusion of higher viscous shear lobes and effusion of lower viscous lava flows. Hence, dome development between 1956 and 1976 was dominated by first endogenous and then extrusive growth, whereas from 1977 onwards the dome growth was mainly marked by extrusive and effusive behavior. This change in growth style will eventually lead to a significantly different shape of Bezymianny’s new edifice.

Fig. 4: Exogenous (extrusive–effusive) dome growth in 1977–1994.
figure4
Aerial orthophotos a, c, e and derived hillshade maps b, d, f show remnants of shear lobes and lava plug together with lava flows, which poured out from multiple open craters.

Full size image
Images from the 1982 overflight unveiled a semi-circular remnant of a 60-m-thick shear lobe in the central part of the dome (Fig. 2e; Fig. 4c, d) that was destroyed during the 11.02.1979 explosive eruption34. In the excavated crater, we identified remnant of a lava flow and 50-m-high remnant of a cylindrical lava plug (i.e., lava extruded from a vent after being solidified43), which was also partially destroyed by additional explosive eruptions. Originating from this new crater, another 700-m-long lava flow was emplaced on the eastern flank of the dome. Aerial data from 1994 signify a new semi-circular shaped, 80-m-thick remnant of a shear lobe that was extruded around the top–center of the dome. Subsequently, this lobe was pierced by multiple lava flows (maximum length 1500 m) that emanated from an excavated crater (Fig. 2f; Fig. 4e, f). Thus, the type of eruptions remained the same since the 1980 s.

In the 2006 images, only the north-western and southern sectors of the previous dome complex are visible: most parts–including the base of the amphitheater–were buried by numerous lava flows and pyroclastic deposits (Fig. 2g; Fig. 5a, b). The deposits reached a maximum thickness of 140 m in the western sector of the amphitheater (relatively to the 1967 base surface). In addition, the summit of the edifice is characterized by a system of coalesced craters: in its north-eastern sector, they were identified by fragments of two concentrically located craters of 300 m and 270 m in diameter, whereas the central part was occupied by one main crater, 200 × 280 m, that was formed during the 09.05.2006 eruption. The position of this crater, most strikingly, remained relatively stable from this point onwards (Supplementary Fig. 4).

Fig. 5: Establishment of symmetric stratocone in 2006–2017.
figure5
Aerial a, c and Pléiades satellite e orthophotos from 2006, 2013, and 2017, and the derived hillshade maps b, d, f. Please note that the dome complex as well as the base of the amphitheater became gradually buried beneath multiple lava flows and pyroclastic deposits, and a summit crater localized at a stable position.

Full size image
The 2013 overflight images show that all flanks of the former dome complex were covered by lava flows and pyroclastic deposits (Fig. 2h; Fig. 5c, d). In particular, the lava flows from the 2009 to 2012 eruptions covered the southern and south-eastern slopes. Pyroclastic deposits add another 30–55 m in thickness in the western sector of the amphitheater. As the edifice acquired a rather symmetric and conical shape owing to repeated coverage by lava and pyroclastics, we can conclude that by 2013, Bezymianny’s former dome complex eventually had converted into a typical stratocone45, which hosts a summit crater and has flanks made up of alternating effusive and explosive deposits.

At last, the data set from 2017 revealed that new lava flows filled the summit crater, and poured onto the western and southwestern slopes during the 2016–2017 eruptions46 (Fig. 2i; Fig. 5e, f). Since 2013, the thickness of pyroclastic deposits had increased by 56 m. The northern and southern sectors of the amphitheater’s rim were buried under the pyroclastics and the new stratocone started to merge with the flanks of the pre-collapse edifice. Moreover, the height of the cone reached 3020 m (~820 m in relative height), which is ~90 m lower than the pre-collapse height in 1949.

Over the entire period of Bezymianny’s regrowth, the total volume of the rebuilt central cone amounts to 0.591 km3 (Supplementary Fig. 5), which suggests that the regrowth of Bezymianny between 1956 and 2017 occurred at an average rate of 26,400 m3/day. The missing volume between the current and the pre-collapse edifice is ~0.147 km3. Thus, assuming that activity at Bezymianny will continue with the detected average rate, the complete refilling of the amphitheater up to the pre-collapse height and volume may be reached between 2030 and 2035.

Vent migration and focusing
After the 1956 collapse, the first endogenous dome (Fig. 2a) emerged from a vent with a location shifted ~500 m to the ESE of the pre-collapse summit (Fig. 6; Supplementary Fig. 4). The inferred vent of the second dome emerged 400 m north-westward from the vent of the first dome, and ~230 m north-eastward from the location of the pre-collapse vent. In the period 1967–1976, the transition to exogenous dome growth was associated with vents concentrating, now having a maximum distance (Dmax) between two furthest vents of ~210 m. During 1977–2006, which was dominated by lava flow activity, the vents focused further, now with a Dmax of ~150 m. Since 2006, when the lava dome started to convert into a stratocone, Dmax has dropped further to ~80 m. The current eruption center is located 270 m ESE of the pre-collapse vent location. Therefore, our observations provide evidence of the gradual vent centralization at the regrowing volcanic edifice. Although a few hundred meters distances between the vent locations along the northwest–southeast axis of the amphitheater are observed (Fig. 6c), lesser variation is visible perpendicular to the sector collapse direction (Fig. 6b).

Fig. 6: Gradual vent centralization.
figure6
a Map with amphitheater outline (dotted line) and farthest eruption centers (circle symbology) identified at different stages of regrowth in the photogrammetric data sets acquired between 1949 and 2017, and location of profiles A–B and C–D. b Profiles A–B, across the collapse amphitheater, showing different stages of topography development. c Profiles C–D, along the collapse amphitheater, indicating the stages of regrowth, and migration and focusing of vents (as shown by circle symbology). d-e Eruption centers migration along NE–SW and NW–SE directions, highlighting a shift/spread and then re-focusing of vents in the NW–SE profile. The reference is a central point between the two first domes. The post-collapse amphitheater profiles were approximated according to ref. 34. I–IV—stages of regrowth: I—endogenous, II—exogenous (extrusive), III—exogenous (extrusive–effusive), IV—stratocone formation.

Full size image
Based on studies analyzing the effects of loading and unloading at volcanoes and their magma pathways14,47,48, we designed numerical models to investigate (i) how the 1956 sector collapse may explain the observed shift in vent location, and (ii) how regrowth of the central edifice relates to the focusing of the vents. We use a 2D boundary element model to simulate magma propagation paths. Our model refers to the cross-section of a mixed-mode magma-filled crack in plain-strain approximation. The most favorable direction for the magma pathway is computed iteratively, following the criterion of maximum energy release14,47. This approach is based on fracture mechanics principles, however, it neglects the dynamics of magma within the fracture so that it cannot account for magma viscosity49. Further detail on the modeling technique and assumptions are provided in the Method section.

Our model domain is a vertical ~WNW-ESE cross-section of Bezymianny volcano (Fig. 6c) and extends from a depth (z) of −0.1 km up to 1.9 km above sea level, which is the approximate altitude of the post-collapse amphitheater’s floor (dashed profile in Fig. 6c). We simulate the stress field owing to topographic changes using loading and unloading force distributions applied at the top of the model 14,47,48 (z = 1.9 km). These force distributions have simplified shapes based on the profiles in Fig. 6c (triangles and trapezoids in Fig. 7). Magma paths start vertically, from the base of the model domain (z = −0.1 km), within a 3 km wide region centered below the summit of the pre-collapse edifice (−1.5 < x < 1.5 km). We choose the depth and extension of the region from where the intrusions start in order to cover the whole area affected by the stress changes associated with the morphological changes we study. This area should not be considered as the location of a magmatic reservoir (which should be deeper at Bezymianny, c.f. Discussion section). Rather, our assumption is that an intrusion would rise from deeper depths and enter vertically our model domain. These models, although being highly simplified in terms of topographic geometry and magma dynamics, are constrained by the Bezymianny morphologies as summarized in Fig. 6c, and the resulting magma paths can be compared with observations of post-collapse vent-shift and the final vent focusing. In fact, magma pathways are influenced by the local stress, whereby changes in the direction of principal stress affect the favorite direction of propagation (see Fig. 7; Supplementary Fig. 6). We find that the unloading owing to the 1956 sector collapse favors magma rising towards and beneath the collapse amphitheater ~300–800 m east of the pre-collapse vent location (0.28 < x < 0.83 km, Fig. 7a), which is in agreement with our photogrammetric observations at Bezymianny and with previous results for the shift of vent location as a consequence of a flank collapse14 (Supplementary Fig. 7). Our simulations for the post-collapse stress scenario results in magma paths that are rather scattered beneath the collapse embayment (highlighted in red in Fig. 7a). In contrast, the paths beneath the rim of the collapse scarp are more focused—pointing at the location of the rim—and get arrested beneath the rim, because of higher compressive horizontal stress due to the rim topography and the horizontalization of some paths, which reduce the effective buoyancy of the intrusion (black paths in Fig. 7a). Also, our photogrammetric observations at Bezymianny suggest that initial dome growth was spread out, causing the formation of two main coalescing domes elongated along the collapse amphitheater. When considering a stress scenario that accounts for the regrowth of the central cone (Fig. 7b), the number of magma pathways rising toward the collapse amphitheater increases, and paths focus, pointing at the location of the center of the new load (Fig. 7b). The distribution of magma pathways beneath the regrowing edifice resembles the distribution of paths below the scarp rim, however, the compressive stress beneath the growing cone is still lower (as in this simulation the new dome topography did not reach the height of the scarp, yet). In addition, a zone of lower compressive stress persists between the two lobes of maximum horizontal compression (in 0 < x < 0.3 km). Such a “corridor” of lower compressive stress may further help magma rising within the new cone (dark red path in Fig. 7b). This is also in agreement with our observations, with vents progressively focusing towards the center of the new cone.

Fig. 7: Stress scenarios and simulated magma pathways on a WNW-ESE vertical cross-section of Bezymianny.
figure7
The colored contours represent the horizontal stress owing to the unloading and reloading force distributions that simulate the effect of edifice collapse and regrowth, respectively (gray triangles and trapezoid shades, respectively). Gray dashes indicate the direction of maximum compression. The trajectories and the shape of magmatic intrusions are plotted in red when they are deflected toward the collapse embayment. Magma pathways that converge toward the rim of the collapse scarp are marked by solid black lines. a Post-collapse scenario: the pre-collapse vent location (white reverse triangle), appears to be inhibited (paths diverge to both sides away from it). The most favorable position for post-collapse vents is within the collapse embayment (red trajectories), because of collapse unloading forces. New vents may be shifted up to several hundreds of meters towards the collapse direction. b Regrowth scenario: more paths are deflected toward the collapse embayment, and they tend to converge toward the center of the loading force distribution associated with the new dome (gray trapezoid). Even though the compressive stress below the collapse embayment is increased by the new dome, it is still lower than the horizontal compression underneath the rim. A region of relatively lower compressive stress (paths highlighted in dark red), may represent a more favorable location for magma paths to intrude within the new dome.

Full size image
Discussion
Repeated decadal acquisition of photogrammetric data allows us to distinguish stages of the Bezymianny regrowth (Fig. 8; Supplementary Table 2). The stratocone edifice was destroyed by the 1956 sector collapse, decapitating the central conduit, and triggering a catastrophic lateral explosion. These events left a pronounced amphitheater morphology. New magmatic activity resumed inside this amphitheater further eastward of the former conduit zone. The post-collapse activity was initially in the form of endogenous growth from two main eruptive centers but changed to primarily exogenous growth with shear lobe extrusions from migrating vents. Then, effusive activity manifested with lava flows emplacement and has continued to the present. As the morphology of the dome built up, it gradually developed into a symmetric stratocone with alternating lava and pyroclastics deposition (see Supplementary Movie 1).

Fig. 8: Main stages of Bezymianny regrowth.
figure8
a 1956–1967 endogenous growth of two lava domes. b 1967–1976 exogenous dome growth through shear lobes extrusion. c 1977–2006 exogenous dome growth through shear lobes and lava plugs extrusion, and lava flows effusion. d 2006—present: stratocone formation through interbedding deposition of lava flows and pyroclastic material.

Full size image
The results from numerical modeling show that the stress change associated with edifice destruction and rebuilding causes the shift of new eruptive vents towards the collapse embayment, (as previously shown for other volcanoes14), and magma pathways pointing toward the center of the area where new topography has formed. These results are consistent with the observation of scattered endogenous dome growth after the collapse, and the successive dome-to-cone transition. However, our numerical models necessarily simplify a much more complex system: several aspects may affect the propagation paths of magma, and their likelihood to feed eruptions. Among others, the interaction with rock heterogeneities, as well as changes in magma density and viscosity (owing to degassing, for instance), were not considered in our simulations. Although it is known that changes in the volcanic edifice loading may affect magma composition and eruptive style10, we still know very little about the effect of magma viscosity on the propagation paths of magmatic intrusions50. The effect of these processes should be investigated with dedicated modeling approaches in order to achieve better insights on their relevance for the observations considered here. Nevertheless, a shift of post-collapse vent locations has been observed at several volcanoes, and Bezymianny fits well within the trend previously shown in ref. 14 (Supplementary Fig. 7), suggesting a common mechanism—related to the amount of mass redistribution—which may be primarily due to the local stress state induced by large topographic changes.

However, mechanisms of regrowth after a collapse likely depend also on factors other than stress changes, such as eruption rate variations (Table 1, Fig. 9, Supplementary Fig. 3). During Bezymianny’s edifice reconstruction, the growth rate decreased noticeably from an initial ~56,000 m3/day (1956–1967) to 33,000 m3/day (1967–1977) and then to 15,500–17,000 m3/day (1977–2017). The constant growth rates coincided with the occurrence of lava flow emplacements that successively covered the older dome complex. We conjecture that the lava flows may have acted as an armor preventing partial flank collapses and stabilizing the new edifice, which eventually facilitated the formation of a stable centralized vent through gradual load increase. Thick and unevenly distributed shear lobes, in turn, may contribute to slope instability leading to partial dome collapses, as was observed at Bezymianny in 198551 and frequently at Shiveluch52.

Fig. 9: Temporal evolution of the Bezymianny volcano characteristics in 1956-2017.
figure9
a Dome volume (red line) and growth rate (blue line) changes. Gray horizontal bars indicate ranges of the eruption rates uncertainties of 2.1–31.2% related to inaccuracies in photogrammetric processing and DEMs alignment (see Table 1; Supplementary Table 1; and Error estimation section in Data and Methods). b Range of vents migration (black vertical bars) at the different stages of regrowth and changes in SiO2 content (blue dots from37 and red dots from56). I–IV—stages of regrowth: I–endogenous, II–exogenous (extrusive), III–exogenous (extrusive–effusive), IV–stratocone formation.

Full size image
Similar to Bezymianny, the post-collapse dome growth at Shiveluch during the 1980–1981 extrusive period was characterized by an initially higher rate of 186,000 m3/day that later decreased to ~60,000 m3/day19. Over the 2001–2012 period of Shiveluch regrowth, the initial rate of resumed extrusive activity was 700,000 m3/day that gradually decreased to 150,000 m3/day52. After the collapse of Santa Maria volcano, regrowth of Santiaguito dome complex was also characterized by multiple episodes53, the highest rate 178,000 m3/day was observed during the first post-collapse episode in 1922–1925. Further the growth of each new dome began with a 3–5-year period of higher rate (50,000–130,000 m3/day), followed by a decrease to ≤16,000 m3/day for up to 11 years17. During eruptive cycles at Mount St. Helens, decreasing of a higher initial rate was also observed. Over the 1980–1986 period, the average rate until 1983 was 370,000 m3/day been then decreased to 78,000 m3/day54. During the 2004–2008 period, the initial rates were in the range of 110,000–450,000 m3/day until mid-2005, and then decreased to 26,000–78,000 m3/day55.

In general, the long-term average growth rate of Bezymianny’s new edifice (26,400 m3/day) is comparable to rates of Mount St. Helens during the 1980–1986 eruptive cycle (30,000 m3/day)54 and Santa Maria in 1922–2000 (38,000 m3/day)17 but notably lower than that of Mount St. Helens in 2004–2008 (173,000 m3/day)31 and Shiveluch in 2001–2012 (225,000 m3/day)52. Yet, the dome growth evolution of Mount St. Helens and Shiveluch does not show any trend toward the formation of a stratocone. This may be owing to intermittent dome growth episodes (Mount St. Helens), the prevalence of destructive over constructive processes (Shiveluch), and/or because these volcanoes have not produced any lower viscosity lava flows that covered and thus stabilized the dome. For Bezymianny, we argue that the transition from the extrusion of shear lobes to the effusion of lava flows in 1977–2006 may mirror a contemporaneous decrease of the viscosity of its eruptive products. In fact, petrologic studies37,56 showed that the silica content decreased constantly between 1956 and 2012 from ~60.4% to 56.8% but without strong kinks (Fig. 9b). This suggests that the rather rapid change in the growth style and extrusion rates was accompanied by a smooth decrease in the silica content.

Moreover, in ref. 37, it was pointed out that the gradual compositional changes may be related to a change of the source depth. The magma feeding system at Bezymianny includes at least two reservoirs37,57. The shallower reservoir is located at ~7 km depth, and the deeper reservoir at ~18 km; they provide possible end-member mixing possibilities explaining gradual compositional and morphologic transitions. In the concept37, the beginning of the dome growth in 1956 was fed by the shallow magma reservoir, which was successively replenished and fed by the deeper reservoir. Since the 1977 eruption, when Bezymianny produced the first lava flow, the deeper magma source became dominant.

The hypothesis of the activation of two different feeding sources, cannot be supported—neither is in contrast—with our magma path simulations: in fact, our model cannot account for viscosity changes. Also, accounting for the mechanical coupling with a magmatic reservoir (not considered here) may not add further constraints, as the unloading and loading force distributions affect magma pathways only at shallower depths (because of the relatively small collapse volume with respect to other cases previously studied with this approach14 (Supplementary Fig. 7).

Nevertheless, an effect of unloading and loading stress on the activation (or inhibition) of reservoirs at depth, may be possible10. At the moment, it is not clear for how long the effect of topographic loading may last, but given the regrowing load of the new cone is approaching pre-collapse conditions, we conjecture that also the stress relationship at depth may become close to the condition as it was before the 1956 sector collapse.

In the past decades, near-continuous activity and recurrent emplacement of lava flows have almost fully restored Bezymianny’s conical pre-collapse shape. This example shows that the process of post-collapse regrowth can be relatively fast, possibly displaying an evolution of volcanoes in general. The regrowth at Bezymianny indeed compares with other similar type andesitic volcanoes, although time scales may significantly vary.

The Santiaguito dome complex has been formed since 1922, thus started two decades after the Santa Maria volcano collapse in 1902. During the early stages of volcanism, endogenous and exogenous lava domes formed at Santiaguito, gradually changing to lava flow dominated regime today53. Santiaguito also experienced the distribution of eruptive centers with a Dmax of ~1300 m and subsequent centralization at the (currently most active) Caliente vent17. On Montserrat Island, Soufriere Hills volcano regained its conical shape in two decades after the 1997 collapse58, but the scale of the collapse and regrowth is much smaller than at Bezymianny. On Anak Krakatau (Indonesia), a stratocone was rebuilding after the 1883 catastrophic eruption, and had repeated collapses to the SW, most recently in December 20184. For the majority of other basaltic-andesite and andesitic volcanoes, the post-collapse regrowth takes thousands of years. For example, cone regrowth after sector collapse at Avachinsky volcano (Russia) took 4000–5000 years59, at Colima volcano (Mexico) 4000 years60, at Merapi volcano (Indonesia) ~1900 years61, and at Parinacota volcano ~2000 years18.

As Bezymianny almost gained the pre-1956 collapse height, a new catastrophic collapse might be prone21,26. During the Holocene, Bezymianny repeatedly produced large-volume pyroclastic flows up to 0.3–0.4 km3 39 that may indicate the occurrence of large destructive events. However, each of those powerful eruptions were followed by a long period of effusive and moderate explosive activity that lasted from hundreds to thousands of years39. The last destructive episode before 1956, was associated with partial flank collapses that left behind two noticeable scars on the western and eastern flanks34, yet their extent is not even close to that of the 1956 (Fig. 1c, e, Supplementary Fig. 2). Moreover, as the 1956 collapse was preceded by a long period of quiescence39 and was triggered by intrusion of a cryptodome (i.e., shallow magma body destabilizing the strength of the edifice)32, we cannot say whether the next catastrophic edifice collapse will occur shortly after reaching the pre-collapse size. What we can say, is that if the current activity will go on (the latest two eruptions occurred in 2019), causing further steepening of the flanks, the volcano’s upper slopes may eventually partially collapse, even in the near future. This clearly poses a hazard to the visitors of Bezymianny. Furthermore, the area of the potential hazard has increased since 2017, when the northern and southern sectors of the amphitheater’s rim were covered with pyroclastics, which led to an unhindered inflow of eruptive material toward the northern and southern feet of the volcano.

Methods
Aerial photogrammetry
Aerial photography of the volcano was first performed in 1949 (before the 1956 collapse). The post-collapse topography was estimated in previous research34 from the 1956 ground-based images, which were taken when the first dome occupied a small area of the amphitheater’s floor (Fig. 1e). The base of the amphitheater was estimated to be ~2200 m above sea level, and its vertical sections across the collapse direction appeared to be close to parabolic. The amphitheater inner walls in the 1967 elevation model were extrapolated according to the estimated parameters34. Information about the morphology after the 1956 sector collapse was also derived from ground-based images20,41, and further by aerial surveys, which were regularly realized since 1967. We used the 1949 archive images to extract the pre-collapse DEM (Supplementary Fig. 2). Then we focused this study on the volcano regrowth by processing eight sets of near nadir aerial photographs acquired in 1967, 1968, 1976, 1977, 1982, 1994, 2006, and 2013. The photographs were taken with dedicated topographic analog cameras AFA 41-10 (1967, 1968, 1976, and 1977; focal length = 99.086 mm), TAFA 10 (1982 and 1994; focal length = 99.120 mm), and AFA TE-140 (2006 and 2013; focal length = 139.536 mm). The cameras have an 18 × 18 cm frame size. The acquisition flight altitude above the mean surface of Bezymianny varied from 1500 to 2500 m in order to capture the entire 1956 collapse amphitheater and surrounding slopes during one pass. For photogrammetric processing, we used 3–4 consecutive shots that provided a 60–70% forward overlap.

The analog photo negatives were digitized by scanning with a resolution of 2400 pixels/inch (approx. pixel (px) size = 0.01 mm). The mean scale within a single photograph depends on the distance to the surface and corresponds on average to 1:10,000–1:20,000. Thus, each px in the scanned image represents ~10–20 cm resolution on the ground.

The software packages Erdas Imagine 2015 v15.162 and Photomod 563 were used for processing, allowing to perform interior and relative orientation of the aerial photographs64, exterior orientation of the stereo models, triangulation, and DEM extraction and correction.

For the interior orientation, the analog cameras’ focal length, frame size, lens distortion, and the position of the main point and fiducial marks were included. The relative orientation of adjacent photographs was performed automatically based on 25 tie points (root mean square errors (RMSE) = 0.1 pixels).

The coordinates of 12 ground control points (GCPs) were derived from a Theo 010B theodolite data set collected at geodetic benchmarks during a 1977 fieldwork. These benchmarks were established on the slopes of Bezymianny before the 1977 aerial survey and then captured with the AFA 41-10 aerial camera. RMSE of the GCPs did not exceed 0.06 m. From this data, we created the 1977 stereo model referenced to the USSR State Geodetic Network65, which itself served as a reference for the following acquisitions similar to how it was performed for Mt. St. Helens31.

Those benchmarks covered by volcanic deposits made it necessary to extract new coordinates similar to ref. 31 of six clearly distinguishable and stable (not affected by eruptions) topographic prominences in the vicinity of Bezymianny (peaks or large rocks). These locations were identified in the georeferenced 1977 stereo model and defined as GCPs used for the exterior orientation of the previous (1949, 1967, 1968, and 1976) and succeeding (1982, 1994, 2006, and 2013) stereo models. Thus, all other stereo models were oriented according to the 1977 model that allowed to perform triangulation for each of them with RMSEs varying from 0.4 to 1.9 m (Supplementary Table 1) depending on the age of images and snow coverage.

The oriented stereo models were used to automatically extract points in the Erdas Enhanced Automatic Terrain Extraction (eATE) module, which applies a normalized cross-correlation algorithm with a window size set to 11 × 11 px, and with a correlation range of 0.2–0.7 for the highest pyramid level and the last pyramid, respectively. The obtained point clouds in LAS format were filtered in CloudCompare v2.9.1 (https://www.danielgm.net/cc/), with the noise filter tool (spherical radius = 0.75 neighbors), which resulted in an average number of points per point cloud of ~300,000 for 5 km2 (0.06 points/m2).

As intensive fumarolic activity prohibited automatic detection of the ground surface, some areas were not processed properly producing gaps in the point clouds. To solve this problem, we imported each point cloud in the corresponding stereo models using the Photomod DTM module and then performed further manual extraction of the missing points by placing a floating mark on the surface in anaglyph stereo mode and storing XYZ coordinates. This manual approach allowed us to visually identify the surface through the light steam that is not possible for the automatic algorithms, similar to performing in ref. 31. This allows also a validation of the automatically extracted points and to process some of the dome elements with better resolution. The resolution of final point clouds varies from 2 m to 30 m depending on the complexity of the surface.

Photographs from 2002, 2005, 2009, and 2010 aerial surveys were considered for visual interpretation and identification of recent lava flows.

Satellite and unmanned aerial vehicle photogrammetry
To complement the temporal coverage of our aerial time-series, we additionally tasked tri-stereo high-resolution Pléiades satellite imagery acquired on 09.09.2017. We used Erdas Imagine to process the three overlapping monochromatic images (spatial resolution = 1 m) in a manner similar to the processing chain described in ref. 66. We identified 45 automatically and manually tracked tie points and used them for the relative orientation of the images (RMSE = 0.1 pixels). The exterior orientation was calculated automatically by employing the provided Rational Polynomial Coefficient data. Eventually, we extracted DEM with the Erdas eATE module and subsequently filtered it with the CloudCompare noise filter. The final LAS point cloud has ~10 million points for 60 km2 (0.16 points/m2).

Yet, the Pléiades images captured strong degassing and shadows, which caused a gap in the point cloud along the western dome flank. But we were fortunate to gather optical images of this area with an Unmanned Aerial Vehicle (UAV) (DJI Mavic Pro) in July 2017. We processed the UAV data set with Agisoft Metashape v1.6.4 (https://www.agisoft.com/downloads/installer), which is carried out by using the default settings for photo alignment (high quality with a 40,000 key-point and 1000 tie-point limit), dense cloud generation (high quality, aggressive depth filtering), and DEM building (WGS84) based on the dense cloud. Eventually, we merged both the Pléiades and the UAV derived point clouds with CloudCompare (RMSE = 0.8 points) and subsampled it to a spatial resolution of 2 m.

Data alignment and referencing
The investigated aerial, satellite and drone data have the same spatial scale but shifted in geo-position, depending on the coordinate system (USSR State Geodetic Network for the aerial data and WGS84 for the merged Pleiades-UAV data) and precision. In order to allow quantitative comparison and analysis of the differently located data, we aligned the aerial point clouds relatively to the merged Pléiades-UAV point cloud with eight distinct points on the 1956 amphitheater’s rim using the CloudCompare software. To avoid alignment errors, we first aligned the 2013 point cloud to the 2017 point cloud (RMSE = 1.3), so that the effect of degradation of the amphitheater rim is minimal. The remaining aerial point clouds were then successively referenced to the next younger point cloud (RMSE = 1.3–1.7). Finally, we obtained nine LAS point clouds referenced to the WGS84 (UTM zone 57 N).

Volumes and growth rates estimation
To quantify changes throughout the evolution of Bezymianny’s new edifice, we calculated volumetric differences between consecutive DEMs with the 2.5D volume calculation tool in CloudCompare, which allowed us to automatically estimate the added and removed volumes by comparing two surfaces. As material may be added (e.g., intrusions, lava, pyroclastics, and tephra deposition) and/or removed (e.g., erosion, explosive excavation, small flank collapses deposited outside the area of the dome) during growth, volume differences may be represented by positive and negative changes that yield in a net volume change. The positive changes were then used to determine growth rates by dividing the volume by the time interval between the dates of the survey.

The volume of the dome over the 1956–1967 period was calculated in previous research34. The 1967–2017 volumes were estimated only within the areas affected by the eruption (dome areas) (Table 1). CloudCompare provides a possibility to preselect an area for volumetric comparison. Each time comparing consecutive DEMs, we outlined a clearly visible border between the dome’s feet and the amphitheater’s inner walls on both DEMs relatively to a later one.

To avoid errors in volume calculation caused by the point clouds alignment, volumes for the aerial DEMs were derived from initial point clouds (unaligned to the 2017 Pleiades-UAV point cloud). Only for the 2017 volume estimation, we used the base surface from 2013 aligned to the 2017 point cloud.

As the exact acquisition dates for the 1967 and 1968 aerial data are unknown, we estimated the acquisition dates based on the angle of incidence of the sun. For each stereo model, we identified the respective pairs of points (peaks on the amphitheater’s rim and shadows from these peaks on the slopes of the dome). The angle data sets from each stereo model were averaged; the azimuths were 209.1° and 239.8°, and the angles of the sun’s fall relative to zenith were 71.3° and 65.3° for the 1967 and 1968, respectively. Using NREL’s Solar Position Algorithm67, we made an iterative search for the date options correspond to these values. For 1967, the appropriate options were 19 Feb. and 24 Oct.; for 1968, they were 3 Apr. and 9 Sept. The estimation accuracy was ±1 day. As both 1967 and 1968 data show only partial snow coverage, the dates of 19 Feb. and 3 Apr. were rejected as too early. The region has snowy winters with a continuous snow cover until late May. For the dates of 24 Oct. and 9 Sept., the snow situation is quite possible, as the snow starts to fall here in the mid-autumn.

Error estimation
The volume estimation errors (Table 1, Supplementary Table 1) in this study mainly depend on the triangulation errors (TRMSE), which are calculated automatically in Erdas Imagine and presented in the triangulation reports. Possible sources of the TRMSE can be camera lens optical distortion, deformation of old analog films, scanner distortion, and manual GCPs assignment. Furthermore, the resolution of the extracted point clouds can also contribute to the volume error. Finally, the RMSE of the point clouds alignment (ARMSE) affects the volume estimation accuracy.

As Bezymianny’s dome is relatively circular symmetric, a slight XY shift of a DEM does not contribute to the volume error as much as Z shift, since a volume adding at one side of the dome is compensated by the same amount of volume removed from the other side. Thus, we consider only Z TRMSE. To determine the contribution of the TRMSRE in volume estimation, we distributed each TRMSE Z value over the respective area affected by eruption (dome area) (Table 1) similar to ref. 31. Depending on the TRMSEs, volume uncertainty varies from 0.5 million m3 (in 2017) to 3.2 million m3 (in 1967) that is 0.1–1.4% of the dome volume.

To estimate volume uncertainty caused by point clouds resolution we used equation (14) from ref. 68. The base parameters for the calculation are the mean distance between points in each cloud, which varies from 2 m (in 2017) to 7 m (in 1977 and 2006), and the standard deviation of the error in the spatially distributed points, which varies from 0.2 m (in 2017) to 0.5 m (in 1967 and 1968). The resolution uncertainties in volume increase between two consecutive point clouds vary from 3900 m3 (in 2017) to 7900 m3 (in 1982) that is >0.001% from the dome volume and might not be taken into account.

As the 2017 DEM was combined from the two point clouds (Pleiades and UAV) with the 0.8 m RMSE in alignment, we distributed this error over the area of the aligned UAV point cloud (430,000 m2). The contribution of this ARMSE to the 2017 volume estimation is 344,000 m3 (0.06%). The 2013–2017 point clouds alignment RMSE (1.3 m) distributed over the 2017 cone area contributes 2,900,000 m3 (0.5%) to the volume error. Thus, the total ARMSE contribution in the 2017 cone volume is 0.6%, and the total 2017 volume error is 0.7% (Supplementary Table 1).

The errors of the growth rates were calculated by dividing the root sum squared volume errors for neighboring dates by the time between them. This model of inaccuracy69 was used because errors at different dates have an equal effect and are independent of each other. The smallest errors of the rates (2.1–4.3%) turned out to be for the periods between 1968–1976, 1982–1994, 1994–2006 because of their longer length and, thus, a high averaging of the values. The largest relative rate error (31.2%) occurs for the interval 1967–1968 owing to the small increase in the volume, which is almost equal to the absolute values of the volume estimation error.

Morphological mapping
To map the features of the Bezymianny new edifice we performed visual interpretation of the high-resolution stereoscopic aerial images in anaglyph mode using the Stereo Analyst module of Erdas Imagine. This method allows an operator, wearing anaglyph glasses, to see the detailed morphology of the studied object in 3D and perform all measurements of the identified features. Each stereoscopic image was carefully compared to the next one to trace the same features and to analyze their development or decay. The results of the interpretation of the dome’s features are based on commonly accepted classification of volcanic landforms and their elements43,70, which reveals the nature and sequence of their formation. The exogenous growth was distinguished from the former endogenous growth by a presence of separate shear lobes, which extruded from the vents or open craters at the different sectors of the dome. The lava flows were recognized by their low thicknesses (from 15 to 30 m), and length to width ratios (from 1.8 to 2.1) in comparison with the thick (from 60 to 110 m) and almost circle-symmetrical shear lobes. Morphologically lava flows differ from shear lobes having a drop shape; their near-vent parts are narrower and thinner than fronts, whereas shear lobes have the highest thickness at their top and near-vent parts as they become thinner at their margins owing to the intensive crumbling of solidified material. There are also differences in the directions of deposition: lava flows spread toward the foot of the dome, and shear lobes are accumulated at the place of extrusion. The lava plugs were identified as cylindrical bodies extruded at the vent areas of the previously emplaced lava flows.

After the stereoscopic interpretation, the elements of the dome were easily identified on the hillshade visualizations of the DEMs and were outlined and shown with different colors (Figs. 3–5). The DEMs visualization and mapping were performed by means of Surfer 10 (https://www.goldensoftware.com/products/surfer), QGIS v3.2.3 (https://www.qgis.org/en/site/), and Inkscape v0.92.4 (https://inkscape.org/) software.

To estimate the migration of the vents in the early decades of edifice regrowth (1956–1967) we consider a vent as a center of an endogenous lava dome, which corresponds to ref. 70 and to the location of a center of an open crater. For the exogenous (extrusive) growth period (1967–1976), we identify a vent location at the thickest part of shear lobes. For the following exogenous (extrusive–effusive) period (1977–2006) the vent locations are identified on the thickest parts of shear lobes, on the vent areas of lava flows, and on the centers of lava plugs. Vents related to the stratocone formation period are distinguished as centers of summit craters.

The changing location and migration of the vents are visualized in profiles (Fig. 6) and along sections created in directions NE–SW and NW–SE across and along the collapse amphitheater. We project the location of the pre-collapse central vent, and of the post-1956 collapse vents from each period of regrowth onto those sections. This allows us to indicate the location of the two most expressed distal vents for each period of regrowth in corresponding vertical lines with remaining maximum distances (Dmax) from each other according to the corresponding profile (Fig. 6d, e).

Magma pathway simulations
Numerical simulations were performed following a previously published approach14,47,48. A short description of the main characteristics and assumptions of this approach are given here.

Magma pathways are modeled as 2D boundary element mixed-mode cracks in plane strain approximation. The modeling plane is perpendicular to the crack plane, therefore the model refers to a cross-section of the intrusion. The crack opening depends on assigned normal and shear stress boundary conditions that are the magma overpressure and the shear component of the topographic stress, respectively. The overpressure along the crack is given by the difference between the magma pressure and the confining stress (superposition of the lithostatic pressure and the normal component of the topographic stress). Topographic stresses are computed using analytical formulas for loading and unloading forces at the surface of an elastic half-space14,47,48. Loading and unloading force distributions are used to model the loading of the pre-collapse volcanic edifice and the stress change induced by the flank collapse14. The model for the magmatic intrusion accounts for the magma buoyancy and compressibility, whereas it neglects magma viscosity. As a consequence, the magma overpressure profile within the crack is linear along the depth and proportional to the magma-rock density difference (hydrostatic overpressure profile). The trajectories within the crust are determined by testing the incremental elongation of the magma-filled crack in different directions. Our algorithm chooses the direction where the sum of elastic and gravitational energy release is maximal47,48.

Here, we applied this model to three stress scenarios, pre-collapse, post-collapse, and cone regrowth.

Pre-collapse scenario: we consider the loading due to the pre-collapse volcanic edifice based on the pre-collapse profile (black solid line) in Fig. 6c. The effect of topography on the crust beneath is modeled by vertical forces applied on a reference horizontal surface at 1900 m on the sea level (which is the approximate altitude of the post-collapse embayment, dashed profile in Fig. 6c). This reference surface represents the upper boundary for the stress calculation and for the magma paths in all simulations. The force distribution is triangular, centered in x = 0 (the center of the pre-collapse edifice), with height Hprc = 1.2 km (so that the altitude of the pre-collapse volcanic edifice is 3100 m), and with base Wprc = 4.4 km. The effect of the triangular loading force distribution is computed in the rocks beneath14. The magnitude of the loading force is proportional to shallow rock density (r1 = 2000 kg/m3, times the gravity acceleration) so that the loading forces represent the mass of the rocks standing over the reference surface. Free surface effects are neglected. We assume that during the emplacement of the pre-collapse edifice, non-elastic effects may have partially released elastic stress, this is accounted by testing different “Effective Volcanic Loading” (EVL)14. Conversely, the flank collapse and the dome growth are very recent events, and therefore we consider them as “purely elastic”14. Different values of EVL were tested (0.5–0.6–0.7), meaning that 50%, 40%, and 30% of the elastic loading had been released at the time of the collapse14. We used the triangular difference approach to simulate the stress relaxation: “Trapezoidal Loading” in ref. 14. Finally, we obtain three scenarios for the “Pre-collapse”, one for each of the EVL values (Supplementary Fig. 6).

Post-collapse scenario: we introduce the unloading force distribution simulating the flank collapse (superposed on the stress owing to the pre-collapse edifice). Here we used a simple triangular profile to approximate the effect of the collapse. The maximum height of the unloading is Hpoc = 0.8 km (in x = 0), the base of the unloading is Wpoc = 2.8 km, from x = −0.6 km to x = 2.2 km. These geometrical constraints are based on the difference between the pre-collapse and post-collapse profiles in Fig. 6c (black solid and dashed lines, respectively). Similar to the pre-collapse scenario, the magnitude of the unloading force is proportional to the density of shallow rocks, but with opposite sign. We do not consider any stress relaxation effect for the unloading forces48, as the collapse event is sudden and recent.

Regrowth scenario: the reloading due to dome growth is introduced. We used a trapezoidal shape for the dome. Based on the 1956–1967 profile of Fig. 6c (first phase of dome growth), the trapezoid has a height Hdg = 0.5 km, with a lower-base Wdg = 1.1 km (from x = −0.25 km to x = 0.85 km) and an upper-base Wdg = 0.37 km. Again, forces are proportional to the shallow rock density, and they are superposed to the post-collapse scenario.

Magma paths in interaction with the background stress are computed for each scenario. Magma paths start from 2 km below the upper boundary for stress calculation (z = 1900 m). For each scenario, we computed 19 independent magma path trajectories with paths starting vertically oriented from a depth z = −0.1 km, on an area as wide as 3 km, centered in x = 0 (center of the pre-collapse edifice).

Magma and rock parameters are as follows:

Magma density: rm = 2400 kg/m3

Magma compressibility: Km = 10 GPa

Magma volumes (2D cross section of the intrusion): A = [9 × 10−4–4 × 10−4] km2

Deeper-rock density: r2 = 2500 kg/m3

Rock rigidity: m = 20 GPa

Rock Poisson’s ratio: n = 0.25

Basaltic open vent volcanoes are major global sources of volcanic gases. Many of these volcanoes outgas via intermittent Strombolian-type explosions separated by periods of passive degassing. The gas emitted during the explosions has high molar CO2/SO2 and SO2/HCl ratios, while during the passive degassing these ratios are lower. We present new laboratory experiments in a model volcanic conduit, which suggest that these differences in gas geochemistry are a consequence of gas migration through crystal-rich magma. We show that gas may flow along channels through the particle-laden liquid and, at a critical depth, the gas may displace an overlying crystal-rich plug en masse, producing a growing slug of gas. Owing to the friction on the walls of the conduit, this plug becomes progressively sheared and weakened until gas enriched in the least soluble volatiles breaks through, causing an explosion at the surface. When the gas slug bursts, liquid is drawn up in its wake, which exsolves the more soluble volatile components, which then vent passively at the surface until the next explosive slug-bursting event.

Introduction
It is well known that volcanic gases emitted from volcanoes that exhibit Strombolian-type eruptions (e.g. Yasur, Stromboli, Villarrica, Erebus) are characterised by cyclic variations in volcanic gas flux and composition1,2,3,4,5, with the bursting of large bubbles called slugs (‘active’ degassing) generating gases with relatively high molar CO2/SO2 and SO2/HCl ratios, and degassing between explosions (‘passive’ degassing) generating gases with lower ratios (Fig. 1a–c). It has been proposed that these cycles in observed volcanic gas composition are associated with separated bubble-magma flow coupled with either magma degassing at different depths in the conduit6 or with the intermittent release of gas slugs from a foam layer deep in the system if gas accumulates at the top of a sill7, 8. However, petrological studies have shown that the magma erupted from these volcanoes is highly crystalline, with > 30 vol.% crystals in the upper few hundred metres below the surface, with the crystallisation largely driven by water exsolution9,10,11,12. The presence of crystals may be a key control on the migration of gas bubbles through the magma. Previous studies show that bubble growth and coalescence processes are directly affected by the amount and size of particles (crystals) in a liquid: at low particle contents, the bubbles are small and round13 whereas at higher particle fractions, bubbles may become trapped and change their shape. At a high magma crystallinity, the gas may migrate through the magma along series of fractures or channels13,14,15,16,17.

Figure 1
figure1
Bimodal volcanic gas signatures associated with active and passive degassing regimes at basaltic open vent volcanoes reveal both shallow and deeper conduit sources. (a) Variation in the surface measurements of CO2, SO2 and HCl over 300 s at Yasur Volcano are caused by Strombolian-type explosions (yellow rectangle)5. (b) At Yasur Volcano, the molar HCl/SO2 ratio during active degassing periods is low whereas during passive periods it is higher5. (c) Molar CO2/SO2 plotted against molar SO2/HCl for volcanic gases emitted during active periods (black symbols) compared to passive periods (white symbols) for a Stromboli2 (circles), Erebus4, 18 (diamonds) and Yasur1, 5 (triangles) volcanoes. The standard deviation of the data is shown by vertical and horizontal bars. The evolution of gas composition with pressure is shown for Stromboli (black solid line) for different pressures (dashed lines)21. (d) The variation of the gas composition (in mol %) in terms of CO2 (grey line), SO2 (violet line), H2O (blue line) and HCl (orange line) in the magma during closed degassing as the pressure varies from 1,600 bar to the surface at Yasur and Stromboli volcanoes21. An interpretive illustration of the shallow conduit is drawn next to each gas exsolution evolution diagram. Stromboli’s crystal-rich zone may extend deeper in the conduit than Yasur’s crystal-rich plug, which would be consistent with the higher molar CO2/SO2 ratio during active degassing at Stromboli (see text for discussion and supporting arguments).

Full size image
Chemical variations in gas emission at volcanoes exhibiting Strombolian activity
In complementary studies, it has been shown that gas emitted from Stromboli2, Yasur1, 5 and Erebus4, 18 volcanoes are characterised by bimodal compositions as quantified by the ratios of CO2/SO2 and SO2/HCl (Fig. 1a–c). Figure 1a,b show that during Strombolian-type eruptions (active degassing) at Yasur, a series of intermittent explosions emit gases with an increased molar ratio of SO2/HCl. These explosions are separated by periods of passive degassing during which the gases released at the surface have lower molar SO2/HCl ratios (Fig. 1a,b). A similar behaviour can be observed at Stromboli and Erebus volcanoes, which shows an even stronger variation between the molar CO2/SO2 ratio during active and passive degassing (caused principally by the higher initial CO2 content in their magma, Fig. 1c)2, 4, 18. At Stromboli, passive degassing is more enriched in HCl than active degassing2 whereas during both phases of activity at Erebus the molar SO2/HCl ratios are similar 4, 18.

The ratios of emitted volcanic gases can be used to estimate gas equilibration depths with some knowledge of their solubility behaviour. The solubilities of volatiles in the magma depends on temperature, pressure and magma composition19,20,21 and the widely accepted sequence of solubility in basaltic melts is CO2 < S < Cl22. Since CO2 exsolves at higher pressures than S and Cl, it has been concluded by many authors that large bubbles causing Strombolian eruptions have a deeper origin compared to bubbles causing passive degassing, which are more enriched in HCl8 (Fig. 1b). Figure 1d shows a representative equilibrium gas exsolution model21 for magma with a composition similar to that of Yasur and Stromboli volcanoes to show the geochemical evolution of the gas phase exsolving from the melt during decompression from 1,600 bar to the surface at a constant temperature of 1,150 °C in a closed and equilibrium degassing mode. In Fig. 1c, the black solid line represents the CO2/SO2 and SO2/HCl gas exsolution line for Stromboli and the curves in Fig. 1d, panel ii are given for CO2, SO2, H2O and HCl in the gas phase for Stromboli. The combination of the measured changes in CO2/SO2 and SO2/HCl ratios at the surface (Fig. 1a–c) and the gas exsolution models (Fig. 1d) suggest that the bimodal gas compositions during ‘typical’ degassing activity originate from two depths, with a deep bubble origin (Stromboli2: 600–150 bar; Yasur5: 180–360 bar, Erebus23: 420–2,100 bar; Fig. 1d) during active Strombolian periods and a shallow bubble source (Stromboli2: 75–0 bar; Yasur5: 120–0 bar; Erebus23: 420–0 bar) for passive periods. We propose that this type of bimodal gas geochemistry is typical of open vent basaltic volcanoes that exhibit Strombolian behaviour and below, we link these trends to interactions between gases and crystal-rich magmas in the shallow plumbing system.

The effect of high magmatic crystallinity on degassing behaviour
To study the influence of a high crystal concentration on magma degassing, we develop an analogue experimental model in which we use a mixture of water, glycerol and particles (with a diameter of 0.002 m) in a 2 m long vertical tube, with a radius of 0.02 m (Table 1). We compare experiments in which the particles occupy 10% to more than 40% of the volume of the liquid-particle mixture. We supply a steady flux of gas in the range 10–3 –7 × 10–3 l s−1 and observe the migration of the gas through the particle-laden liquid (Fig. 2). In the experiments, for convenience, we allowed the particles to settle to the base of the tube prior to adding the gas flux. As we report, with a thin particle zone, the particles mixed throughout this liquid layer to form a low-particle content liquid; with the higher gas fluxes, the particles did not mix to the top of the liquid layer, but remained as a high particle-content zone with a pure liquid layer above. This liquid layer did not appear to influence the processes in the underlying particle layer, but allowed for easy observation of the gas leaving the top of the particle-laden layer.

Table 1 Experimental parameters. A systematic increase of particle load allowed for between 24 and 27 experiments for each experimental set-up (A–D).
Full size table
Figure 2
figure2
Analogue experiments reveal the presence of particles may cause intermittent bursting of slugs interspersed by passive degassing regimes. (a) Photos of a low particle content experiment (particle fraction ≤ 0.1) in a vertical tube illustrating the frequent ascent of smaller bubbles in a liquid with suspended particles. (b) Time series of images from a high particle load experiment showing the formation, migration and bursting of a gas slug. Panel (i) to (vii): Image taken every second. (c) Image showing the transport of coloured liquid in the wake of a slug as it rises through the particle-rich mixture. Slug moves on a timescale of 10 s whereas liquid moves on a timescale of 1,000 s, which might lead to the shallow exsolution of dissolved gas from the magma. (d,e) Illustration showing channel flow in the deeper conduit and intermittent growth, ascent and explosions of the gas slugs, shaded blue, giving rise to the active degassing periods and channel flow near the surface giving rise to passive degassing, shaded purple . The crystal content in the magma is illustrated by the grey colour scale. All panels are described in the text.

Full size image
In the low particle load experiment, we find that small bubbles rise continuously and form a dilute particle suspension, as seen in Fig. 2a6,7,8, 24. In contrast, in the experiments in which there is a large particle load in the liquid, we find that a particle suspension does not develop and instead, the gas migrates upwards through small channels in the packed layer of  particles, as has been reported by15,16,17. However, in the present experiments, we also find that on reaching a depth of about 0.4 to 0.5 m below the top of particle layer (corresponding to particle volume fractions of 40 to 60%), a gas slug steadily grows below the overlying particle plug, which as a result, is displaced upwards. This growing slug causes the overall level of the liquid-particle mixture to increase (Fig. 2b, panels i-iv). Eventually, the plug above the growing slug is weakened by the internal deformation associated with the frictional stress from the walls of the conduit, and the slug of gas breaks through to the surface (Fig. 2b, panels vi–viii) where the gas is emitted and the process resumes (Fig. 2b, panel ix). During gas ascent, some of the deeper liquid is drawn up in the wake of the gas, exchanging with the liquid originally above the slug (Fig. 2b, panel vii, 2c).

Transition from channel flow to slug formation
We may rationalise the behaviour described above for the high particle load experiments, in that the particles become close packed and develop an effective frature strength25,26,27,28,29. The supply pressure of the gas that is supplied at the base of the system, is able to overcome this  strength and form a local channel in the pack along which the gas can flow. In the lower part of the particle pack, the supply pressure is smaller than the sum of the weight of the overlying column of liquid and particles (i.e. the column-static pressure) plus the static friction resisting the bulk displacement of the overlying particle pack along the walls. However, as the gas migrates upwards, the depth of the overlying particle pack becomes progressively smaller, and so both (i) the column-static pressure and (ii) the static friction suppressing the motion of the overlying particle pack decrease. Eventually at a critical depth, the gas is able to displace the overlying particle pack and there is a transition from channel flow to bulk displacement of the overlying particle pack. This leads to formation of a gas slug as further gas continues to be supplied from the deeper channel flow and accumulates in the slug (Fig. 3).

Figure 3
figure3
Simplified shallow volcanic conduit showing our model for Strombolian eruptions. (a,b) Simplified illustration of the volcanic conduit showing channel flow, a slug and a particle plug as well as the cycle of slug growth, plug weakening, slug bursting and plug reformation, as discussed in text. (c) The length of the particle plug, L, is plotted as a function of the gas overpressure, ΔP for a vent radius, r, equal to 10 and 5 m. (d) The relation between the gas flux, Q, and ΔP. For a given gas flux, the dynamic overpressure is smaller for a magma with larger value of the lubrication layer dh or lower viscosity (grey line).

Full size image
Once the particle plug starts moving, the overpressure determines the frictional resistance of the particle plug on the walls of the conduit. This wall stress also leads to gradual deformation of the particle plug as it moves upwards. Eventually the plug loses its strength, enabling the gas to break through to the surface. The process then repeats.

The depth at which the gas can form a slug is given by the balance between the gas overpressure ΔP, which is given by the fracture strength of the particle pack, the coefficient of static friction on the walls, λ, and the normal stress on the conduit walls, integrated from the slug to the surface of the crystal-magma plug, leading to the balance in Eq. (1). We have integrated the product of the normal stress on the wall of the conduit over the area of the crystal plug. In doing this we require a model of how the overpressure of the bubble is dissipated across the plug, since on the upper surface of the plug the pressure is atmospheric. For simplicity, we assume the overpressure ΔP leads to a linear pressure gradient through the plug which produces a part of the normal stress on the wall of the conduit, the remainder being associated with the magmastatic pressure; the static frictional stress is equal to the fraction λ of this normal stress. Just before the plug begins to move, the vertical force associated with the overpressure on the base of the crystal plug matches this frictional stress:

Δ Pr2π=2πrλ(ΔPL2+ρgL22)
(1)
where r is the radius of the particle plug, L is the height of the particle plug, ρ is the density of the liquid-particle mix and g is the gravitational acceleration. This balance determines particle plug size, L, for a given overpressure. Using the parameters for our experiments, and the observation that L = 0.5 m, Eq. (1) suggests that at the onset of motion, ΔP has a value of order of 10 Pa, which is consistent with earlier laboratory measurements26, 27 .

Subsequently, the plug begins to move upwards and the system adjusts so that the overpressure matches the stress on the walls. The speed of the particle pack is constrained by the gas flux, Q, from depth. If the motion of the plug is lubricated by liquid at the walls of the conduit, the vertical growth of the gas slug in the particle pack grows upwards with the speed, u, and has overpressure, ΔP, given by:

u=Q/(r2π)
(2)
2πrLμudh=Δ Pr2π
(3)
where dh represents the thickness of the lubricating fluid layer at the edge of the conduit, which we expect to scale with the diameter of the particles, and µ is the viscosity of the melt.

In our experiments, we find that u = 0.01 m s−1 and so we estimate that ΔP = 10 Pa, using the value µ = 0.23–1.0 Pa s, which is appropriate for the glycerol-water mixture at room temperature and assuming that the boundary layer thickness dh is of order 0.001 m comparable to the size of the particles.

As the slug rises and breaks through to the surface, we observe that some liquid is drawn up in the wake of the slug, thereby exchanging fluid between the upper particle plug and fluid deeper in the conduit (Fig. 2c). After the release of the gas, a particle plug reforms at the top of the conduit, and the process repeats (Fig. 3b).

Although the model is highly simplified, and does not simulate all the complexities of the observations of Strombolian eruptions30,31,32,33, it does illustrate some of the episodicity, which may arise when gas migrates through a crystal-rich liquid. It is nonetheless of interest to explore the magnitude of the model predictions using parameters for a volcanic system. In Fig. 3c, we show the relation between ΔP and the length of the plug, L, (Eq. (1),(2)) and find that for a magma fracture strength of order 105–106 Pa, the model predicts a plug length L in the range 10–30 m if the conduit has a radius of order 5–10 m. In Fig. 3d, we show the overpressure as a function of the rate of growth of the slug as given by Eq. (3). We find that for gas fluxes of 1–500 m3 s−1, the overpressure required to drive the plug to the surface is of order ~ 105–106 Pa if the lubricating layer has thickness dh of order 0.03–0.001 m, consistent with the size of the crystals in the melt, assuming the magma has a viscosity in the range of 103–104 Pa s. We note that in a volcanic conduit, the frictional resistance may also be influenced by the roughness of the conduit walls, which may span a comparable range of length scales.

At Stromboli Volcano, we expect the magma to have a viscosity of 4,400 Pa s34, a conduit radius of about 3 m35 and a crystal size of 0.001 m10. With these parameters, our model suggests that the length of the plug is of order 10–50 m and with a gas flux in the range 0.4–1.9 m3 s-1 the eruption period is about 13 min. Moreover, the plug which is filled with crystal-rich magma with a crystal content of about 50 vol. % 10 (composition in appendix Table 3) could store as much as 8–38 m3 of gas. Depending on the rate of gas-flow through the plug, some of this could then issue from the vent during the passive degassing phase. For Yasur Volcano, if we use a viscosity of 6,722 Pa s, a conduit radius of 4 m and a crystal size of 0.005 m 9, the model suggests that the plug length is in the range 10–25 m and that with a gas flux in the range 4–10 m3 s-1 the dynamic overpressure is similar to the overpressure at the onset of the motion of the plug. This leads to an eruption period of about 2 min. These simple estimates of eruption frequency at Stromboli and Yasur are comparable to those reported in previous studies2, 5, 30,31,32,33. Yasur’s plug is filled with a crystal-rich9 magma containing 32 vol. % of crystals (composition in appendix Table 3). This could be host to as much as 6–16 m3 of gas, some of which may issue during the passive degassing phase. This total mass is an upper bound on the mass of gas which may be present in the plug owing to the separation of the gas from the melt deeper in the conduit. However, these values illustrate that there is a significant volume of gas available for exsolution from the melt, and some of this may be associated with the passive degassing phase of the eruption cycles.

Conclusion
The range of phenomena in our experiments has some analogy with that observed at volcanoes that exhibit Strombolian activity. When the crystal content is high, between 30 and 60 vol.% we observe intermittent explosions interspersed with passive degassing behaviour. In contrast, with smaller particle concentrations, the flow more closely resembles a steadily bubbling liquid column leading to much smaller temporal fluctuations in flow and hence in mean gas composition (Fig. 2a).

Turning back to the field data on gas composition, we suggest that bubbles accumulating in the slug reflect the CO2 and SO2 signature of gas ascending from greater depths so that typical Strombolian explosions have gas with a relatively high molar CO2/SO2 and SO2/HCl ratio. In contrast, the magma transported to shallow depths in the wake of the slug degasses at low near-surface pressures, consistent with depths of 10–50 m, leading to passive venting of gas with a low molar CO2/SO2 and SO2/HCl ratio, as seen in Fig. 1c.

This new picture of Strombolian activity in a high crystal content magma is consistent with observations at other volcanoes and it would be interesting to collect more high frequency data on the gas geochemistry to provide further insights into the processes that control Strombolian eruptions.

The global carbon dioxide (CO2) flux from subaerial volcanoes remains poorly quantified, limiting our understanding of the deep carbon cycle during geologic time and in modern Earth. Past attempts to extrapolate the global volcanic CO2 flux have been biased by observations being available for a relatively small number of accessible volcanoes. Here, we propose that the strong, but yet unmeasured, CO2 emissions from several remote degassing volcanoes worldwide can be predicted using regional/global relationships between the CO2/ST ratio of volcanic gases and whole-rock trace element compositions (e.g., Ba/La). From these globally linked gas/rock compositions, we predict the CO2/ST gas ratio of 34 top-degassing remote volcanoes with no available gas measurements. By scaling to volcanic SO2 fluxes from a global catalogue, we estimate a cumulative “unmeasured” CO2 output of 11.4 ± 1.1 Mt/yr (or 0.26 ± 0.02·1012 mol/yr). In combination with the measured CO2 output of 27.4 ± 3.6 Mt/yr (or 0.62 ± 0.08·1012 mol/yr), our results constrain the time-averaged (2005–2015) cumulative CO2 flux from the Earth’s 91 most actively degassing subaerial volcanoes at 38.7 ± 2.9 Mt/yr (or 0.88 ± 0.06·1012 mol/yr).

Introduction
Volcanism is the primary mechanism through which carbon (C) stored in the deep Earth1,2 is transferred to surface environments to feed C exchanges in the atmosphere-ocean-biosphere system3. Over geological time, volcanic CO2 emissions have been a key control on atmospheric-oceanic CO2 levels4,5,6,7,8, ultimately regulating evolution of climate and life on our planet9,10.

The global volcanic CO2 flux in modern Earth remains inadequately known11,12 and, ironically, is less constrained for subaerial volcanoes than for the less-accessible mid-ocean ridges, for which the 3He flux13 or the CO2/Ba ratio14 proxies have successfully been applied. Direct volcanic CO2 observations at subaerial volcanoes are technically challenging from both ground11,15 and space16 due to the large atmospheric CO2 burden, and thus remain limited in number17,18. The volcanic CO2 flux can be quantified indirectly by combining simultaneous acquisitions of UV-sensed sulphur dioxide (SO2) fluxes11,15,19,20 and gas compositions (CO2/SO2 ratios), but gas observational networks are still in a developing stage21,22, resulting in sparse and incomplete gas catalogues23,24. CO2 flux data have so far been obtained11,15 for only <60 of the several hundred currently degassing Holocene volcanoes25. CO2 flux records are continuous enough only for a few (<10) volcanoes where permanent instrumentation is operating26,27,28,29, while sparse results (one or a few campaign-style measurements at most) are available for the remaining ~50. In addition, scarce or even no information exists for several top-ranking degassing volcanoes30 in remote regions of the world (e.g., Vanuatu31, Papua New Guinea, the Solomon arc, and the Sunda-Banda arc in Indonesia32,33). Attempts to extrapolate available measurements to all the subaerial degassing volcanoes have been problematic11,23 and require use of questionable statistical approaches34,35. Estimates of the global volcanic CO2 flux thus vary widely, from 66 to 540 Mt/yr11,23.

Ideally, refining the volcanic CO2 inventory would require a comprehensive record comprising simultaneous composition/emission measurements for all the currently active strong volcanic gas emitters globally. The top-degassing volcanic targets during 2005–2015 (Table 1) have recently been identified30 from satellite-based observations of the SO2 flux using the Ozone Mapping Instrument (OMI). Carn et al. (ref.30) identified 91 volcanoes, listed in Table 1, releasing SO2 at rates above the OMI detection limit of 16 tons/day. Gas CO2/ST ratios (where ST is Total Sulfur, corresponding to SO2 in these strongly degassing magmatic-volatile emitting volcanoes) are available for 57 out of these 91 volcanic sources36, from which SO2 fluxes can straightforwardly be converted into CO2 fluxes (Table 1). The remaining 34 volcanoes, however, have so far been impossible to characterise for gas composition, owing to their remoteness and/or poor accessibility, leaving their CO2 fluxes unconstrained.

Table 1 Gas composition and fluxes for the 91 strongest SO2 volcanic gas sources in 2005–2015 worldwide (from Carn et al., 2017).
Full size table
Here, we explore an alternative approach of indirectly inferring the CO2/ST ratio signature of these “unmeasured” volcanoes, and ultimately their CO2 flux, based on the (far more commonly measured) trace element compositions of their erupted volcanic rocks. Volcanic arc gas CO2/ST ratios and whole-rock trace element ratios (e.g., Ba/La or Sr/Nd ratios) are globally linked36, as both volatiles and fluid/melt-mobile elements (e.g., Ba and Sr) are sourced from fluids delivered from dehydration/melting of subducting slab sediments and altered ocean crust37,38,39,40,41,42. Based on their gas vs. whole-rock associations, arc volcanoes cluster into three Groups36. Group 1, which includes C-poor arc volcanoes (gas CO2/ST ratios ≤2), are thought36 to be sourced by a mantle wedge source contaminated by C-poor slab fluids (derived from either terrigenous sediments or altered oceanic crust). Group 2 volcanoes are assumed to inherit their C-richer (2≤ CO2/ST ratios ≤4) gas composition from incorporation into the mantle wedge of slab fluids derived from melting of carbonated sediments. Group 3 (CO2/ST ratios >4), finally, includes C-rich arc gases, supporting the involvement of an additional crustal C contribution (de-carbonation/assimilation of upper crustal limestones43,44).

We here establish systematic gas vs. rock relationships at the scale of individual arc segments and/or groups of volcanoes. These relationships, once set, allow us to predict the CO2/ST ratio for any volcano for which trace-element whole-rock information (but not gas composition) is available. Ultimately, using these predicted CO2/ST ratios in tandem with available SO2 flux information30, we derive CO2 fluxes for all current top-degassing volcanoes and, by summation, a refined inventory of decadal (2005–2015) global CO2 emissions from subaerial volcanism.

Results
CO2 fluxes for the Earth’s best-studied volcanoes
Roughly ~62% of the 91 strongest volcanic SO2 sources globally30 have been characterised for both SO2 flux and (episodically) for volcanic gas compositions (Table 1). CO2 fluxes are thus obtained (see “Methods”) by pairing the OMI-based time-averaged 2005–2015 SO2 fluxes30 with the characteristic (mean) CO2/SO2 ratios in the corresponding high-temperature magmatic gases (data from ref.36 unless otherwise noted). The so-derived CO2 fluxes (Table 1) range from 28 to 15,800 tons/day, and are in reasonable agreement (typically within a factor ≤40%) with the CO2 fluxes estimated using ground-based SO2 flux measurements11,15. We estimate the cumulative CO2 flux from the 57 volcanic sources with “measured” gas compositions by applying a Monte Carlo method (see Table 1) to the dataset. The obtained cumulative “measured” flux is 27.4 ± 3.6 Mt/yr (or 0.62 ± 0.08·1012 mol/yr).

Matching gas and whole-rock trace element compositions
Thirty-four top-ranking volcanic SO2 sources do not have gas compositional records (Table 1). We hereafter refer to such volcanoes without CO2/ST information as “unmeasured” volcanoes.

We thus explore a methodology to predict the characteristic volcanic gas CO2/ST ratio of each of these 34 “unmeasured” volcanoes using their averaged trace-element volcanic rock composition (Table S1). Gas CO2/ST ratios in arc volcanoes exhibit systematic global relationships with slab fluid trace-element proxies (e.g., Ba/La or Sr/Nd ratios) in the corresponding whole-rocks, which are interpreted36 as resulting from a common CO2-Ba-Sr derivation from melting of subducted sediments in the slab40 (variably enriched in CO2; ref.42). These relationships, once set at the scale of individual arc segments (Figs 1 and 2) or volcano Groups (Fig. 3), can now be used to infer the representative volcanic gas CO2/ST ratio signature of the 34 “unmeasured” volcanoes (Tables 1 and S1).

Figure 1
figure1
The proxy approach for estimating the CO2/ST ratio for “unmeasured” volcanoes (i.e., those for which no gas data exist), based on the averaged trace-element composition of the corresponding volcanic rocks. The procedure is illustrated for Pacaya volcano in Guatemala. Firstly, the association between CO2/ST ratios in volcanic gases (corresponding to CO2/SO2 gas ratios in the high-temperature systems studied here) and whole-rock Ba/La ratios is established at the scale of the Central American Volcanic Arc (CAVA) segments, using data for volcanoes for which both gas and trace element data are available (see Table S1a). Secondly, the gas vs. trace-element trend is fitted via either a linear or logarithm best-fit regression function. Tests made excluding (panel A) or including (panel B) the compositional point of the Depleted Mid-ocean ridge Mantle (DMM; refs123,124) in the data-fitting found that the second option systematically led to the best-data fits (see Table 2). Finally, the preferred regression model function (RM3 in the Pacaya example; see panel B and Table 2) is used to calculate a “predicted” gas CO2/SO2 from available Ba/La data for Pacaya whole-rocks (uncertainty is estimated from confidence interval at one standard deviation on the regression). Our inferred gas CO2/ST ratio (1.4 ± 0.75; Table 2) is well within the magmatic gas range (CO2/SO2 ratio of 1.1 ± 1.0.) measured during recent plume observations46. A similar CO2/ST ratio (see Table 2) is predicted using the CAVA gas vs. Sr/Nd ratio association (panel C). In this plot, the yellow and green dashed lines are the linear best-fit regression lines for Group 1 and 2 sub-populations, respectively.

Full size image
Figure 2
figure2
Scatter plots of mean Ba/La whole-rock ratios vs. volcanic gas CO2/ST ratios (panels A, D and G), whole-rock Sr/Nd ratios (panels B, E and H) and whole-rock U/Th ratios (panels C, F and K) for three arc segments (left, Central America; middle, Southern America; right Sunda-Banda arc in Indonesia). Each symbol corresponds to an individual volcano for which gas and trace element information is simultaneously available (see Tables S1a–c for the list of volcanoes, compositions used, and data sources). The gas vs. trace element correlations are explained in terms of mixing between a C-Ba-Sr-U-poor Depleted Mid-ocean ridge Mantle (DMM) and C-Ba-Sr-U-rich slab fluids. C-poor arc volcanoes (Group 1, in green) plot close to the DMM, while Group 2 arc volcanoes (in yellow) are C-enriched to larger slab fluid influx. The even more C-rich signature of Group 3 arc volcanoes (in red) may reflect some addition of crustal carbon36. For each arc segment, panels A, D, and G show the best-fit regression functions used to predict the volcanic gas CO2/ST ratios for “unmeasured” volcanoes (open symbols; see Tables 1 and S1b–d). The grey lines illustrate (for two “unmeasured” volcano examples) the procedure used to convert whole-rock Ba/La ratios into gas CO2/ST ratios, using the equations of the best-fit regression lines.

Full size image
Figure 3
figure3
Scatter plots of mean Ba/La whole-rock ratios vs. (A) volcanic gas CO2/ST ratios, (B) whole-rock Sr/Nd ratios and (C) whole-rock U/Th ratios (panels C, F and K) for Group 1 volcanoes (green, see Table S1d) and Group 2 volcanoes (yellow, see Table S1e) globally. Each symbol corresponds to an individual arc volcano for which gas and trace element information is simultaneously available (see Tables S1d–e for the list of volcanoes, compositions used, and data sources). Volcanoes with no gas compositional information are shown as open circles. The Vanuatu arc volcanoes are plotted in light green. The best-fit regression functions through the populations of Group 1 and Group 2 volcanoes are separately illustrated. Group 1 volcanoes exhibit little change in gas CO2/ST ratios on increasing Ba/La. Their mean CO2/ST ratio of 1.2 ± 0.5 (see Table S1d) is thus adopted for all the “unmeasured” (for gas) Group 1 volcanoes (Table 1). For the “unmeasured” Group 2 volcanoes, we average the predicted volcanic gas CO2/ST ratios obtained from regression functions RM3 and RM4 (see Tables 1 and S1e).

Full size image
The procedure is illustrated in Fig. 1 and Table 2 for Pacaya volcano as an example (see “Methods”). The initial step involves establishing a CO2/ST vs. Ba/La relationship using data for volcanoes for which both gas and trace element data are available (for the specific Pacaya example, we use gas/whole-rock information for Central American volcanoes, see Table S1a and Fig. 1). As in previous work36, the representative CO2/ST ratios used in Fig. 1 (listed in Table 1 and S1a) are obtained by averaging available results for high-temperature gas samples, in the attempt to reduce the effect of secondary processes (e.g., magmatic S scrubbing during gas-water-rock reactions45) that become substantial at hydrothermal (temperature <400 °C) conditions. Secondly, regression analysis is used to fit the gas vs. trace-element association via either a (i) linear or (ii) logarithmic regression model (Fig. 1; see “Methods”). We focus on the two regression models based on the assumption that linear/logarithmic functions best describe depleted mantle (DMM)-slab fluid mixing in a CO2/ST ratio vs. Ba/La (or Sr/Nd) compositional field36. Finally, the adopted regression function is used to derive a “predicted” gas CO2/ST from available Ba/La whole rock data (Fig. 1). In the specific Pacaya example (Fig. 1 and Table 2), using a linear regression to fit the volcanic gas and DMM data-points (our RM3 regression model, see “Methods” and Table S1), the “predicted” gas CO2/SO2 ratio is 1.4 ± 0.75, well within the magmatic gas range (CO2/SO2 ratio of 1.1 ± 1.0) recently determined46 from plume measurements (Fig. 1).

Table 2 Comparison between measured46 and predicted (this work) volcanic gas CO2/ST ratios in the Pacaya magmatic gases.
Full size table
CO2/ST ratios from individual-arc gas vs. trace-element relationships
Gas vs. rock (trace element composition) associations are initially analysed at the scale of individual arc segments, in the assumption that, at such regional scales, sources and transport pathways of volatiles and trace elements are relatively uniform. In truth, intra-arc variations in thickness, age, thermal properties and composition of the slab and overlying plate47, and in the composition of subducted sediments42, are large enough to impact the mechanisms of magma generation, and thus impart regional trends in volatile48 and trace element49 signatures of erupted magmas. Nonetheless, it is on these individual-arc trends that we rely below. Three arc segments have enough volcanoes measured for both gases and rocks to allow reliable gas vs. rock associations to be established (Fig. 2).

The Central American Volcanic Arc (CAVA) CO2/ST vs. Ba/La relationship, obtained from results listed in Table S1a, is illustrated in Figs 1 and 2a. The systematic along-arc trace-element patterns in CAVA volcanic rocks49 (Fig. 2b,c) originate from changes in geometry, age, thermal regime and extent of serpentinization of the subducting Cocos plate slab50. As more recently found36,51, such trace-element variations correlate with those of CO2/ST ratios in high-temperature magmatic CAVA gases. These correlations (e.g., Figs 1 and 2a) have been explained36,51 as resulting from the variable addition of C-Ba-Sr-rich fluids issuing from melting of limestone-bearing slab sediments, with the highest slab-fluid influx being observed in Nicaragua52, where magmatic gases consistently have C-rich (Group 2) affinity (Fig. 2a). In Costa Rica and El Salvador, magmatic gases are typically C-poorer36,51 (Group 1), in line with the lower slab affinity (and more depleted mantle-like signature) of trace-element ratios (Fig. 2). All the CAVA volcanic SO2 emitters of Table 1 have been measured for gas composition (at least for their CO2/ST ratio), except for Guatemalan volcanoes Fuego and Santa Maria. We use the CAVA CO2/ST vs. Ba/La association (of Fig. 2a) to fill this gap of knowledge. Using the RM3 regression model in tandem with mean whole-rock Ba/La ratios (Table S1a and Fig. 2a), we infer CO2/ST ratios of respectively 1.7 ± 0.75 (Fuego) and 1.6 ± 0.75 (Santa Maria).

Our compilation (Table 1) shows that volcanic gas CO2/ST data are available for the majority of the volcanic SO2 emitters in the Northern (NVZ), Central (CVZ) and Southern (SVZ) Volcanic Zones53 of the Andes (Southern America). Very limited gas information is available54 for Ecuadorian volcanoes, however, and here we use the CO2/ST vs. Ba/La association (for South-America: Fig. 2d) to fill this knowledge gap. In the Andes, there is documented evidence in the literature for large along-arc variations in volcanic rock trace-element geochemistry55,56,57,58. Our partial whole-rock dataset, based on the subpopulation of Andean volcanoes listed in Table S1b, demonstrates an overall south-to-north increase in trace-element slab-fluid proxies (Ba/La, Sr/Nd and U/Th; Fig. 2e,f), from Copahue volcano in Argentina (SVZ) to Nevado de Ruiz in Colombia (NVZ). Importantly, the along-arc variations in the volcanic gas CO2/ST ratio scale well with the trace-element variation patterns (Fig. 2d), again suggesting common source processes. The trace-element signature of the three most actively degassing volcanoes today in Ecuador, Tungurahua59, El Reventador60 and Cotopaxi61 (the latter not appearing in the 91 list of top degassing volcanoes30), places Ecuadorian magmatism in an intermediate position between Colombian volcanoes in the NVZ (the richest in Ba and Sr, but also CO2; Fig. 2d) and intermediate C-rich Peruvian volcanoes62 further to the south (in the CVZ). The mean Ba/La ratios, combined with the CO2/ST vs. Ba/La linear regression model displayed in Fig. 2d, constrain the CO2/ST ratio for Tungurahua and El Reventador at 2.5 ± 0.8 and 2.2 ± 0.8, respectively (see Table 1 and S1b). A consistent CO2/ST ratio is inferred for Cotopaxi (2.5 ± 0.8).

The case of Indonesia, which includes the Sunda-Banda and Sangihe-Halmahera arc segments, is particularly problematic (Fig. 2g–k). The large along- and within-arc variations in crustal63 and slab64 structures, combined with heterogeneities in the sedimentary slab input42 (Fig. 4), make it difficult to characterize regional trends in volatile sources. In the Java sector of the Sunda arc, the respective roles of crust and slab in controlling rock65 and gas66 geochemistry are widely debated, with some authors stressing the importance of upper plate assimilation67,68 and others emphasising a slab control69,70,71. The Group 3 signature36 of Merapi and Bromo (Fig. 2g) supports involvement of crustal carbon in Central Java72. South-to-north along-arc trends in gas 3He/4He (decreasing) and CO2/3He (increasing) ratios66 suggest a crustal volatile contribution is also likely in Sumatra, where the crust is especially thick and limestones widely exposed63,67. In contrast, crustal assimilation is supposedly minor (if any) in other sectors, including west and east-Java65, Nusa69,73 Banda74 and Halmahera33. In these segments of the Sunda-Banda and Sangihe-Halmahera arcs75, along-arc variations in He-C isotopes66,76,77, and the sparse high-temperature gas information, suggest variable C delivery from the slab, and thus coexistence of Group 1 and 2 volcanism (Fig. 2g). This is not unexpected, in view of the C heterogeneity in subducted sediments, from terrigenous and C-poor (Sumatra-Java) to pelagic and C-richer (Nusa, east Sunda)42 (Fig. 4). The diverse volatile sources that are possibly involved, in addition to the paucity of gas data, create scatter in CO2/ST vs. Ba/La (Fig. 2g). Only 9 Indonesian volcanoes have been measured for both whole-rock trace element composition and (high-temperature) magmatic gas composition (Table S1c). These CO2/ST vs. Ba/La data can be fitted by either a linear (RM3) or logarithm (RM4) regression model with identical regression coefficients (R2 = 0.52; Fig. 2g). We therefore infer the CO2/ST ratio signature of the “unmeasured” Indonesian volcanoes (Table 1) by averaging the output of the two regression models (Table S1c). The low regression coefficients (Fig. 2g) imply the inferred CO2/ST ratios should be treated with caution, as they require validation/refinement with an improved (more than 9 data-points) gas vs. trace element relationship. We caution, in particular, that the predicted CO2/ST ratios (Table 1) may either over-estimate (for Group 1 volcanoes) or under-estimate (for Group 3 volcanoes) by a factor ~1.3 (the max error in Fig. 2g) the real volcanic gas CO2/ST ratios of “unmeasured” Indonesian volcanoes.

Figure 4
figure4
Global map illustrating the location of the 91 strongest volcanic CO2 emitters (data from Table 1). CO2 flux information for both “measured” (circles with black borders) and “unmeasured” (circles with red borders) volcanoes is shown. Dimension of the symbols is proportional to CO2 flux, with color fill reflecting the CO2/ST ratio (see legend). Trenches are differently colored depending on CO2 bulk concentration in the trench sediments (data from ref.42). The map shows that the most strongly CO2 degassing volcanoes are clustered in tropic to sub-tropical regions such as the Vanuatu-Papua New Guinea arc segments, in Central America, Southern American (Northern Volcanic Zone), and in the Lesser Antilles, in addition to Italy (Etna), Congo (Nyrangongo + Nyamuragira) and Hawaii (Kilauea). Volcanic CO2 fluxes are typically lower in higher latitude volcanic regions such as in the Aleutians-Kamchatka-Kuriles and in the South-Sandwich Islands, where no carbonate-rich lithologies are subducted at the trenches. The map was generated using the open source QGIS software (available at https://www.qgis.org/it/site/) (Copyright © 2019 AIUPPA. Permission is granted to copy, distribute and/or modify this document under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License, Version 1.3 or any later version published by the Free Software Foundation; with no Invariant Sections, no Front-Cover Texts, and no Back-Cover Texts. A copy of the license is included in the section entitled “GNU Free Documentation License”). The base map is a relief and bathymetry Raster called «Natural Earth II with Shaded Relief and Water» file #NE2_HR_LC_SR_W.tiff (Made with Natural Earth. Free vector and raster map data @ naturalearthdata.com). As for the shaded relief, we use the CleanTOPO2 layer, a modified SRTM30 Plus World Elevation Data also edited by Tom Patterson, US National Park Service. The original source data is from ref.125.

Full size image
CO2/ST ratios from Group-based gas vs. trace element relationships
Several of the “unmeasured” (for gas) volcanoes in Table 1 are sited in arc segments for which insufficient gas/rock information is currently available to establish individual-arc associations (as those analysed in Fig. 2). In order to derive information on their CO2/SO2 ratio gas signature, we use the global relationship between CO2/ST and Ba/La in Groups 1–2 volcanoes (ref.36) (Fig. 3).

The majority of the remaining “unmeasured” (for gas) volcanoes in Table 1 are sited in arc segments for which available deep sea drill holes point to the lack of C-rich lithologies (limestones) in the subducted sediment succession42 (Fig. 4). Trench sediments poor in C have been identified in the segment of the Pacific Ring of Fire (Fig. 4) that stretches from Aleutians-Kuril-Kamchatka to the N/NW to Marianas/Japan/Philippines further south (10 “unmeasured” volcanoes in total – see Table 1). Where high-temperature gas information is available, a CO2-poor (Group 1) signature of volcanic gases36 has typically been observed in such carbonate-poor trenches (Fig. 4), matching well the small sedimentary slab C input42. Sediments are similarly C-poor (e.g., prevailingly terrigenous and biosiliceous42) in the Tonga and South Sandwich arcs (3 “unmeasured” volcanoes; Fig. 4). We therefore assign to Group 1 all the “unmeasured” (for gas) arc volcanoes fed by carbonate-poor trenches. Group 1 volcanoes exhibit little change in gas CO2/ST ratios with increasing Ba/La (Fig. 3a). This implies either (i) limited C delivery from the slab in the absence of carbonated sediments (e.g., that fluids/melts delivered by terrigenous sediments, altered oceanic crust and/or serpentinite are not major C sources36), or (ii) that slab C and S are added to the mantle wedge in 1:1 to 4:1 proportions at most (Group 1 volcanoes typically have CO2/ST ratios ~3–4 times higher than the DDM). The lack of dependence on Ba/La (Fig. 3a) means that we can prudently use the measured Group 1 CO2/ST ratio average (1.2 ± 0.5; see Table S1d) for all the “unmeasured” (for gas) Group 1 volcanoes in Table 1.

Group 2 volcanoes are, by definition36, those having CaCO3-rich sediments in their trenches. These volcanoes typically have more C-rich volcanic gas composition (CO2/ST ratio >2 but ≤4) and exhibit stronger, steeper correlation between gas CO2/ST and trace element ratios (Fig. 3a). These Group 2 volcanoes are located in high biological productivity zones close to the tropics, where sediments are increasingly biogenic in nature and/or where seafloor is shallow enough (above the calcite compensation depth, CCD) to support carbonate deposition42 (Fig. 4). Of the few remaining “unmeasured” (for gas) volcanoes in Table 1, those in the Papua New Guinea-Solomon-Vanuatu arc segment are thus potential candidates for Group 2. The Papua New Guinea-Solomon arc sectors (Fig. 4) are a particular challenge because no gas samples are available, and no deep sea drill holes have been placed in the seafloor of the Solomon Sea, seaward of their trenches. Likewise, there are few relevant piston cores to provide any seafloor samples. Our inferences are thus based on seafloor depth, assumptions about the regional CCD, and drill sites in other, nearby southwest Pacific marginal seas. At DSDP Site 63, in the East Caroline Basin north of New Britain, carbonate lithologies were encountered throughout the entire section, from the Quaternary to the middle Oligocene basaltic basement78. This site, at 4472 m water depth, has thus been above the CCD over its entire history. Similarly, drilling at DSDP 287 (4653 m water depth), in the Coral Sea south of Papua New Guinea and east of the Solomon Islands, intercepted abundant carbonate lithologies through most of the sedimentary section to its lower Eocene basement79. Given that the water depths of the Solomon Sea are predominantly <4500 m seaward of the New Britain, Solomon and Northern Vanuatu trenches, we expect this seafloor to have been above the CCD for much of its history as well, and thus to be delivering carbonate-rich sediment to these subduction zones. Based on the above, we consider it very likely that “unmeasured” volcanoes in the Papua New Guinea- Northern Solomon-Vanuatu arcs belong to Group 2. We use therefore the CO2/ST ratio vs. Ba/La global association for Group 2 volcanoes (see Fig. 3a) to predict (based on trace element information) CO2/ST ratios ranging from 2.1 ± 0.7 to 2.7 ± 0.7 for these volcanoes (Tables 1 and S1e). We note that the two “measured” volcanoes in the central and southern Vanuatu arc (Bembow on Ambrym Island, and Yasur on Tanna Island) both exhibit Group 1 gas affinity (CO2/ST of 1.5–1.6), implying that the predicted C-richer gas signature for northern Vanuatu volcanoes requires validation from measurements.

Discussion
Validity of whole rock trace element proxy for CO2/ST
Our predicted CO2/ST ratios stand on the assumption that gas compositions are linked to trace element compositions of their source magmas at either regional (Fig. 2) or global (Fig. 3) scale. Implicit in establishing such relationships is that gas (CO2/ST) and trace-element (Ba/La) whole-rock tracers are inherited by the same processes at their source, and are similarly conserved during magma ascent, decompression and degassing/eruption36. For Ba/La, a link has been made between signatures of arc rocks and subducted sediments at corresponding tranches80, so that this and other trace element ratios are commonly used as slab-fluid proxies for charactering the mantle source of magmas81,82. Both elements exhibit incompatible behaviour during magma differentiation, so that the source-inherited ratios are essentially conserved during magma evolution, at least for the mafic to intermediate (andesitic) magma compositions considered here (as outlined in the Method).

The behaviour of volatile components CO2 and S is obviously complex during the generation and evolution of slab fluids and mantle-derived magmas83. Not only are slab sources and processes only partially understood for C and S12,39, but these volatile species will be selectively extracted from melt and partitioned into the vapour phase according to their melt solubilities (that dependent in a complex fashion on magma T-P-X-redox conditions), upon magma decompression and differentiation84,85. One may thus argue that degassing-related fractionations, for which abundant model86,87,88, experimental89 and observational90 evidence exists, act as to render the CO2/ST ratios in both degassed melt (preserved in melt inclusions in phenocrysts) and exsolved vapour (discharged as volcanic gases) unrepresentative of the mantle source compositions, and thus unlinked91 to Ba/La or other trace element proxies.

Where sufficient data exists (e.g., Figs 2a,d and 3a), however, the CO2/ST vs. Ba/La correlations appear systematic and statistically significant, and we consider unlikely that these associations are purely accidental. Our regional/global associations here, thus, implicate that the time-averaged CO2/ST ratios of volcanic gases ultimately reflect the volatile ratios in the parental (un-degassed) melt, and in the mantle source. To reconcile this with the well-established degassing-driven CO2 vs. ST fractionations, we observe that, at least at mafic systems, comparison between measured and modelled (from numerical simulation of magma degassing paths using volatile saturation codes86,87,88) gas CO2/ST ratios typically imply equilibrium pressures (e.g., pressures of final gas-melt segregation) of 0.1–5 MPa during quiescent degassing activity29,36,84,85,92. Thus, at least during non-eruptive periods, during which the majority of the volcanic gas observations in the literature are taken, observations and models both indicate very shallow (a few hundred meters below the magma-air interface) gas segregation from the convecting feeding magmas93,94. If shallow closed-system degassing conditions85,94 prevail, then the magmatic gas phase released as volcanic gas during open-vent activity does represent an integral of volatiles exsolved from melt during most (P > 5 MPa) of the magma decompression path. This released magmatic gas is thus very similar in composition to the source and parental melt volatile signature, irrespective of its hydrous (for arc volcanoes) or more H2O-poor (for non-arc systems) nature20,93. The short-lived (days to weeks) pulses of CO2-rich gas, seen prior to eruption of mafic arc volcanoes27,28,29,84,92, imply somewhat deeper (typically, ~10–30 MPa) last gas-melt equilibration, but yet suggest closed-system is maintained up to rather shallow levels in a magmatic plumbing system, at least during quiescence. During basaltic explosive activity, deeper gas segregation is implied by gas observations95,96, but such eruptive degassing contributes only a minor fraction of the total degassing budget, which is dominated by passive emissions93.

The lack of a systematic correlation between volcanic gas CO2/ST ratios and SO2 fluxes (Fig. 5) further supports the idea that the former are not significantly affected by variable extents of magma degassing and gas-melt separation depths at various volcanoes. In mafic systems, the SO2 flux is a proxy for the rates of magma degassing in a volcano’s shallow (<3 km) plumbing system93. As such, at least in principle, shallow magma ascent and decompression should be tracked by increasing SO2 flux and decreasing CO2/ST ratios in the surface gas output26, a relationship that is not observed in our global dataset (Fig. 5). The SO2 flux-independent, distinct CO2/ST distributions of Group 1, 2 and 3 volcanoes (see Fig. 5) suggest, instead, that source signature, rather than degassing, ultimately controls the longer-term, time-averaged volcanic gas compositions. We caution that CO2/ST ratio volcanic gas compositions may become less source-related in intermediate to silicic systems, where the gas output is often buffered by gas-melt equilibration in crustal, vapour-saturated magma reservoirs97,98,99,100. It is thus possible that part of the scatter in our gas vs. trace-element associations (Figs 2 and 3) is caused by the intermediate (andesitic) systems included in our dataset. Silicic systems have intentionally been excluded from our compilation.

Figure 5
figure5
Scatter plot exploring the relationship between the SO2 flux (2005–2015 mean; data from ref.33) and the volcanic gas CO2/ST ratio for the population of “measured” volcanoes in Table 1. For Turrialba + Poas (T), we plot the best-guess estimate for the magmatic gas CO2/ST ratio for Turrialba volcano (data from 28 top-ranking volcanic point sources of SO2 (left) and CO2 (right) during 2005–2015. Data are from Table 1. SO2 fluxes are 2005–2015 means from ref.30. The CO2 fluxes are calculated from SO2 using measured or predicted CO2/SO2 ratios (see Table 1). Different volcano groups are identified by different colours. The global CO2 budget is dominated by CO2-rich Group 2–3 arc volcanoes. Two rift volcanoes (Nyiragongo and Nyamuragira) and one within-plate (WP) volcano (Kilauea) appears in the top-10 list of CO2 emitting volcanoes.

Full size image
The good match between our predicted and measured CO2/SO2 ratios at Pacaya volcano (Fig. 1) also support, although indirectly, the validity of our gas vs. trace element associations. In addition to Pacaya, recent airborne gas measurements54 at Tungurahua and Cotopaxi volcanoes in Ecuador have found CO2/SO2 ratios (in the 2 to 2.5 range) fully overlapping our predicted range (2.5 ± 0.8; Table 1). These successful tests provide confidence in the robustness of our predicted CO2/ST ratios. We caution that, in order to validate our methodology further and reduce the scatter in gas vs. trace element scatter plots (e.g., Fig. 3g), gas observations should be prioritized in remote, unexplored volcanoes in Papua New Guinea, Sandwich Islands, Solomon Islands, Sumatra, east Sunda-Banda, and north-Vanuatu. In some of these arc segments (e.g., Sumatra, Sunda), crustal C may be involved63,66,67, in which case our predicted CO2/ST ratios may underestimate the actual magmatic gas ratio (by a factor up to ~1.5–2). We also advise that, since only high-temperature (SO2-dominated) gas data are used to establish our gas vs. trace-element associations (Figs 2 and 3), our predicted CO2/ST ratios are representative of the magmatic gas signature, irrespectively of whether or not hydrothermal processes are acting to alter the actual and total gas volcano emissions. For example, the hydrothermal (H2S-rich) gas emissions from Marapi volcano in Sumatra have measured CO2/ST ratios of 20.5 ± 1.1 (Table 1), well distinct from what we would predict (CO2/ST ratio of ~2.6) using the whole-rock Ba/La (19 ± 3; Table S1c) and the Indonesian gas vs. trace-element relationship (Fig. 2g). As such, discrepancy between measured and predicted CO2/ST ratio at any other hydrothermal volcano may lead to apportioning the fraction of S lost to (or C produced by) the hydrothermal system. While we believe that hydrothermal processing should be the exception rather than the rule for the satellite-sensed volcanoes here, we ultimately anticipate our predicted CO2/ST ratios (Table 1) will require revision and upgrading as new high quality gas data become available for newly measured volcanoes.

One important aspect to consider is that our regional/global associations (Figs 2 and 3) are based on averaging trace element information for rocks erupted during decades to millennia of volcanic activity. As such, the CO2/ST ratios predicted from such associations should be viewed as long-term means over a volcano’s lifespan, rather than the instantaneous measurements as obtainable by direct gas observations. These “geologic” gas CO2/ST ratios may thus serve, when combined with measured S content in mafic glass inclusions, to estimate the initial CO2 content in parental, un-degassed melts, and eventually in the sub-arc mantle. Both are similarly poorly contrained101,102 due to pre- and post-entrapment loss to vapour of poorly soluble CO2.

A decadal global CO2 flux budget
Our predicted CO2/ST ratios are converted into CO2 fluxes (Table 1) by assuming ST = SO2 and scaling to the OMI-based mean SO2 fluxes for the 2005–2015 period30. We focus on the OMI satellite dataset owing to advantages brought by its global and coincident observations, but yet observe that quantitatively similar results would be obtained using ground-based SO2 flux observations instead15. The predicted CO2 fluxes range from 57 tons/day (Kanlaon volcano in the Philippines) to 6200 tons/day (Bagana volcano in PNG) (Figs 4 and 6). Uncertainty in the derived CO2 fluxes (see Table 1, column N) is based on propagation of the respective errors on SO2 flux (column G) and predicted CO2/ST ratios (column I).

Figure 6
figure6
The 28 top-ranking volcanic point sources of SO2 (left) and CO2 (right) during 2005–2015. Data are from Table 1. SO2 fluxes are 2005–2015 means from ref.30. The CO2 fluxes are calculated from SO2 using measured or predicted CO2/SO2 ratios (see Table 1). Different volcano groups are identified by different colours. The global CO2 budget is dominated by CO2-rich Group 2–3 arc volcanoes. Two rift volcanoes (Nyiragongo and Nyamuragira) and one within-plate (WP) volcano (Kilauea) appears in the top-10 list of CO2 emitting volcanoes110.

Full size image
The total cumulative CO2 emissions from the 34 “unmeasured” volcanoes (those with no measured gas information available) would thus be ~11.4 ± 1.1 Mt/yr (~0.26 ± 0.02·1012 mol/yr), thus adding an additional ~34% to the cumulative “measured” mean CO2 emissions in 2005–2015 (27.4 ± 3.6 Mt/yr; Table 1). Finally, our extrapolated (measured + predicted) CO2 flux budget is 38.7 ± 2.9 Mt/yr (or 0.88 ± 0.06·1012 mol/yr). It is important to notice that our approach, in which the CO2/ST ratio signature of each volcano is independently evaluated, leads to far better constrained CO2 budget (7% uncertainty at 1 SD) that would be possible using any “averaged” volcanic CO2/ST ratio proxy (as has been often attempt in past studies). For example, scaling the mean global SO2 flux (23 ± 15 Mt/yr) to the mean volcanic CO2/ST ratio (2.7 ± 3.6) (all data from Table 1) would lead to a global CO2 flux of 62 ± 92 Mt/yr (e.g., 148% uncertainty at 1 SD).

Based on our results, we infer that 6 strongly degassing volcanoes with time-averaged (2005–2015 means) CO2 fluxes of ≥ 5000 tons/day dominate the global CO2 budget (Figs 4 and 6). One of these (Bagana, PNG) is an “unmeasured” volcano and would not have been identified as a top CO2 emitter without the proxy approach developed here. It is interesting to observe that while the SO2 global budget is dominated by the Group 1 volcanoes (accounting for 13 out of the 28 strongest volcanic SO2 sources; Fig. 6), the CO2 global budget is predominantly determined by the CO2-enriched arc volcanoes in Group 2 (13 out of 28) and Group 3 (5 out of 28, with 2 - Popocatepetl and Etna - in the top-5 list) (Fig. 6). Two continental rift volcanoes (Nyiragongo and Nyamuragira) and two within-plate volcanoes (Kilauea and Erebus) also appear in our top-28 list of volcanic CO2 emitters (Fig. 6).

Our extrapolated global CO2 flux of 38.7 ± 2.9 Mt/yr is lower than previous global volcanic CO2 flux estimates in the literature, ranging from 66 to 540 Mt/yr (see ref.11 for a review). Several causes can explain this mismatch.

First, and most importantly, our global volcanic CO2 budget here only includes the contribution from the “strongly degassing volcanoes” that emit SO2 in quantities large enough to be detected from space (by OMI in this specific case30). We therefore admittedly do not take into consideration in our estimate the CO2 contribution from mildly degassing “magmatic” volcanoes (those still emitting SO2, but at levels too low to be resolved by satellites) and from “hydrothermal” volcanoes in which CO2 is emitted in combination with H2S (instead of SO2). Although typically exhibiting weaker surface gas manifestations, compared to the OMI-detected volcanoes characterised here, these magmatic-hydrothermal systems do often exhibit C-rich gas compositions36 (reflecting the extent/mechanism of gas-water-rock reaction with meteoric-hydrothermal fluids45), and do emit CO2 at the ~1000 tons/day level in the most extreme cases17, but most typically in the hundreds of tons/day range15. Considering that several hundreds of volcanoes worldwide are currently undergoing mild magmatic-hydrothermal degassing activity, this emission type could be responsible for the emission of several tens of Mt CO2/yr globally11,15. Also, we do not account for the CO2 output from volcanic lakes103, and diffuse/regional soil CO2 emissions around volcanic systems104, for which more data and alternative extrapolation approaches would be required. We therefore stress our results are not intended to represent total CO2 emissions from global subaerial volcanism, but rather the magmatic CO2 budget fraction contributed by the most actively degassing volcanoes on Earth.

Secondly, the mismatch in the estimated CO2 fluxes (this work and previous studies) derives (at least partially) from the distinct gas datasets used. We here specifically base our CO2 budget calculations on a consistent set of coincident (satellite-based) SO2 flux measurement, taken during a relatively short (decadal) period and with same retrieval/processing technique. In contrast, previous estimates have been hampered by the combination of sparse observations, taken over several decades, and with diverse observational/retrieval techniques. Even volcanoes which are persistently active alternate periods of elevated degassing with phases of reduced activity, and so non-coincident observations (taken over periods spanning several decades) may lead to biases. For example, by combining measurements taken between 1954 and 2011, a cumulative CO2 flux of 59.7 Mt/yr (from 33 measured volcanic gas plumes) was obtained11, or 2 times more than our mean 2005–2015 flux. We also explicitly use CO2/SO2 information for high-temperature magmatic gases only, in contrast with previous efforts23 in which individual arc CO2 emissions have been quantified also considering low-temperature hydrothermal gas samples in which the C-rich composition is not representative of the strongly degassing “magmatic” arc systems. We also cannot rule out that part of the discrepancy is due to our Ba/La approach, which may only represents the sub-Moho magmatic CO2 flux, and not a potentially large44 recycled crustal CO2 flux. Finally, our “measured” CO2 dataset is extrapolated to the total number of “unmeasured” strongly degassing volcanoes by predicting, for each of them, the specific CO2/SO2 ratio gas signature, rather than relying on the assumption that the global CO2 flux population obeys a specific statistical distribution (e.g., the power law distribution105).

Our results implicate that the arc volcano C flux (~8 ± 0.6 Mt C/yr) corresponds to a significant amount (~50%) of the subducted sedimentary carbonate (15 ± 2 Mt/yr; ref.106), but only a relatively small fraction ( < 21%) of the total C input at arc trenches (40–114 Mt C/yr; refs1,12). Thus, either the C input is balanced by “diffuse” C output forms, such as regional aquifers or soil degassing107 in the arc crust, or a substantial fraction of the subducted C is ultimately not erupted, but rather stored either in the lithospheric mantle8 or in the deep mantle1,2.

Methods
The SO2 flux compilation30 we rely on in this study includes a list of the 91 top-ranking volcanic SO2 degassing sources in 2005–2015 (Table 1). This set of consistent (identical retrieval/processing technique) and simultaneous (global) measurements has improved upon the shortcomings of previous catalogues108, which combined SO2 fluxes obtained with diverse techniques and in disparate temporal intervals (often differing by several decades).

These SO2 flux data are converted into CO2 fluxes by using either measured or predicted molar CO2/ST ratios. For these strongly degassing volcanoes, ST is assumed to correspond to SO2 throughout, since SO2 detection by satellites implies limited or no interaction with hydrothermal system (and thus trivial reduced S species, such as H2S).

Measured volcanoes
For 57 out of these 91 volcanic SO2 sources, we convert SO2 fluxes into CO2 fluxes, by pairing the former with the characteristic (mean) molar CO2/ST (CO2/SO2) ratios in the corresponding volcanic gases (Table 1). For arc volcanoes, we use the time-averaged molar CO2/SO2 ratios compiled by (ref.36), integrated with novel gas information for eight new targets that have only recently been measured for the first time (see Table 1 for data provenance). Arc volcanoes are ranked in Groups (1 to 3) following the original categorization36. For non-arc volcanoes (here referred as Group 4), we average available volcanic gas information in the literature (see Table 1 for data sources). Note that, for both arc and non-arc, in cases where more than one volcano are listed in the original dataset30 (e.g., Nyiragongo + Nyamuragira) due to insufficient spatial OMI resolution, we averaged the available volcanic gas information for the individual volcanoes, weighting each volcano’s CO2/ST ratio by its ground-based S flux (where available) to obtain a combined CO2/ST ratio for the pair (see Table 1).

Unmeasured volcanoes
Thirty-four out of the 91 top-ranking volcanic SO2 sources30 have never been characterised for volcanic gas composition (Table 1). These include four of the top-ten ranking volcanic SO2 emitters30 (Bagana, Rabaul and Manam in Papua New Guinea, and Aoba in the Vanuatu archipelagos; Fig. 4). To indirectly infer the molar CO2/ST ratio gas signature of each of these 34 volcanoes, we use the averaged (mean) trace-element composition of the corresponding volcanic rocks. To this aim, as in earlier work36, we extract trace-element information (Ba, La, Sr, Nd, U and Th whole-rock concentrations) either from the Earthchem data-portal (http://www.earthchem.org/), or from other sources (for volcanoes that do not appear on Earthchem) (see Table S1). Mafic to intermediate (<55% SiO2) rocks are only considered, same as in other work109. From these, we calculate, for each volcano, the mean (±1 SD) of the Ba/La whole-rock ratios (Sr/Nd and U/Th ratios were also calculated; see Table S1). These ratios, in combination with the gas vs. whole-rock relationships illustrated in Figs 1–3, are finally used, to predict the characteristic volcanic gas CO2/ST ratio signature for each of the 34 “unmeasured” volcanoes.

The procedure is exemplified in Fig. 1 for the Pacaya volcano example. We select Pacaya because the recently obtained gas compositions46 can serve as a test of the methodology. The initial step involves establishing the relationship between CO2/ST gas ratios and whole-rock Ba/La ratios, using data for volcanoes for which both gas and trace element data are available (see Fig. 1; Table S1). The CO2/SO2 vs. Ba/La relationship can be established at the scale of individual arc segments (e.g., Figs 1 and 2), or for volcano Groups36 (Groups 1 or 2) (Fig. 3). For the Pacaya example, we rely on gas/whole-rock information for the well-characterised Central American Volcanic Arc (CAVA; Fig. 1). Secondly, we use regression analysis to fit the gas vs. trace-element association via either a (i) linear or (ii) logarithm regression model (Fig. 1). We find that linear regression yields the best data fit in the majority of the cases (see the Pacaya example, Fig. 1a,b), and this regression model is used throughout unless where indicated (see Table S1). We also find that data fitting is systemically optimised when the DMM composition is included in the fitting procedure (compare Fig. 1a,b), and this option is maintained throughout. Note, however, the method output (e.g., the outputted CO2/ST ratio) is poorly sensitive to this choice (see Table 2). Finally, the adopted regression model function (RM3 in the Pacaya example; Fig. 1 and Table 2) is used to calculate a “predicted” gas CO2/ST from available Ba/La information (Fig. 1). The confidence interval or delta, calculated from the regression line and one standard deviation about the regression, is taken as a proxy for the uncertainty in the predicted CO2/ST ratios. Uncertainty on the predicted ratios, as derived, incorporates (although indirectly) uncertainty/variability in “measured” gas CO2/ST ratios (average uncertainty at 1σ, ~26%) and whole-rock Ba/La ratios (average uncertainty at 1σ, ~16%) (see Table S1). In the specific Pacaya example (Fig. 1 and Table 2), our “predicted” gas CO2/SO2 ratio (1.4 ± 0.75) matches well the recently measured45 magmatic gas range (CO2/SO2 ratio of 1.1 ± 1.0). Our tests show that remarkably similar CO2/SO2 ratios (see Table 2) are obtained using other trace-element slab fluid tracers, such as the Sr/Nd ratio (Fig. 1c). We opt in the following for the Ba/La regression model because (i) La is more frequently available than Nd in the Earthchem dataset for the majority of the volcanoes, and (ii) use of the Sr/Nd ratio requires a priori knowledge of volcano affinity for a specific Group (Group 1 and 2 typically exhibit diverse distributions in a CO2/SO2 vs. Sr/Nd scatter plot; see Fig. 1c). This latter information is frequently not a priori available (see below). The same procedure is applied to all unmeasured volcanoes (Table S1a), and the “predicted” ratios (assumed to correspond to CO2/SO2) are combined with SO2 flux results to ultimately infer the CO2 fluxes (Table 1).

Tectonic or subduction erosion refers to the removal of upper-plate material from the forearc at convergent margins. Subduction erosion has been suggested to represent a major process associated with the transfer of crustal material into the Earth’s mantle at subduction zones. However, few studies have attempted to trace the fate of eroded forearc crust beneath volcanic arcs, where the eroded crust might first emerge after mixing with the upper mantle, owing to the formidable challenge associated with quantifying the rate of subduction erosion and the contribution of eroded crust to arc magmas. In this Review, we summarize the evidence for subduction erosion at convergent margins and show that, through integration of geochemical and geological data in arc settings where critical crustal lithologies can be accessed, quantification of the contribution of eroded forearc crust to arc magmas is possible. We further emphasize the importance of establishing arc–forearc compositional links and illustrate the role of arc petrogenetic models for determining whether the eroded forearc crust contributes substantially (that is, greater than a few percent) to the construction of new arc crust in subduction zones or whether it is primarily exported to the deeper mantle.

Key points
Subduction zones recycle upper-plate crust by subduction erosion in volumes that can exceed those of the subducted trench sediments.

The composition of the eroded crust is varied and can include upper and lower continental crust, as well as oceanic crust.

Strong, compositional forearc–arc links exist.

Arc magma petrogenesis plays a key role in elucidating forearc–arc connectivity.

Tectonically eroded crust can refertilize shallow and deep mantle alike.

Introduction
Plate tectonics results in the transfer of crustal material into the Earth’s convecting mantle at subduction zones1,2,3,4,5. Subducted crust can include marine sediment, which forms through deposition of eroded material from the upper continental crust on the subducting lithospheric plate6; altered oceanic crust (AOC); and tectonically eroded crust (‘subduction erosion’) removed from the crustal basement of the overriding plate1,7,8,9,10. Trench sediment and AOC have measurable volumes and distinct compositions, which allow their distribution in the mantle to be traced through the composition of arc2,3,11,12,13,14 and intraplate magmas5,15,16. However, despite the clear potential for eroded material to influence arc7,17,18,19,20 and intraplate magmatism5,21,22, as well as the Phanerozoic balance of crustal destruction and growth7,23, the role of the eroded crust in magma petrogenesis remains uncertain.

Subduction erosion removes crustal material from the forearc of the upper plate along modern subduction zones. Although subduction erosion operates at depths that are largely inaccessible24, it can be indirectly inferred from geological data of the forearc (Fig. 1). For example, the large-scale and long-term subsidence of the forearc (up to 5,000 m)1,25,26, alongside bathymetric and seismic images consistent with a dynamic, time-progressive erosion of the forearc8,24,27,28, indicates that subduction erosion can transfer similar quantities of crust to the mantle as subduction of trench sediment7,10,20.

Fig. 1: Subduction zone cartoon of erosive margin.
figure1
The location of the frontal prism, resistive backstop and the subduction channel are shown in the right-hand inset. Material from the frontal prism can be eroded by incorporation into the subduction channel. AOC, altered oceanic crust. Adapted with permission from refs17,24, Geological Society of America and from ref.18, Elsevier.

Full size image
After mixing with the mantle, subducted crustal material first emerges at volcanic arcs located above the descending slab29,30,31. Comparative trench-arc studies demonstrate that, following transfer of crustal components to relatively shallow mantle depths (~100–200 km), the geochemical signatures of trench sediments2,3,6, AOC30,32,33,34,35,36 and lithospheric serpentinites37,38,39 re-emerge in arc magmas. However, few studies have addressed whether eroded crust is recycled in the mantle wedge and, therefore, contributes to arc magmas5,17,18,19,20. Detecting the presence of eroded crust in arc magmas is challenging, as it blends with the other recycled crustal components, particularly trench sediment7,20. In addition, contribution from eroded crust can also present similar geochemical signatures to those produced by interaction of primary arc magmas with pre-existing crustal basement en route to the surface40 (Fig. 1).

In this Review, we present a summary of subduction-erosion processes at convergent margins and discuss how erosion recycling in arcs can be identified through detailed arc–forearc analysis. In addition, we note that recent analyses of erosion recycling beneath several volcanic arcs worldwide, alongside new models of arc petrogenesis, indicate that subduction erosion can have an important role in the geochemical modification of both the shallow and the deep mantle.

The subduction pathway of eroded crust
Convergent margins are typically classified as either erosive or accretionary, based on the balance between the removal of crustal material by subduction erosion and the growth of the upper plate owing to frontal accretion41,42,43,44 or underplating45 (Fig. 2; Supplementary Information)1,10. At erosive margins, there is a net removal of material from the upper plate45,46, whereas at accretionary margins, there is net growth. However, it is important to note that subduction erosion can still occur beneath accretionary margins and, thus, contribute to the geochemical signature of arc volcanoes worldwide.

Fig. 2: Classification of margins as erosive or accretionary and comparison to arc εNd values.
figure2
Data represent the average εNd values for n = 785 Quaternary arc volcanoes, calculated from available GEOROC data229 and precompiled datasets of the Central American Volcanic Arc230 and of the Central Andean Volcanic Zone231. BC, British Columbia; CVZ, Central Volcanic Zone; F. R., Fernández Ridge; NVZ, Northern Volcanic Zone; OW, Oregon–Washington; R., Ridge; SVZ, Southern Volcanic Zone.

Full size image
A common feature of actively eroding margins is the frontal prism (Fig. 1 item a), which has a semi-constant width of ~10 km to 20 km, variable thickness (<1 km to ~5–6 km) and is commonly characterized by landwards-dipping seismic reflectors. Frontal prisms are typically composed of upper-plate material (that is, sediment and disaggregated basement), which accumulates at the toe (Fig. 1 item b) of the outer forearc24, or sediment scraped off the incoming plate to form a small accretionary prism47. The frontal prism is backed by a resistive ‘backstop’ (Fig. 1 item c), which represents the dynamically stronger rock framework of the forearc.

As the incoming oceanic plate subducts beneath the overriding plate, basal erosion of the forearc occurs. Erosion of the forearc causes the trenchwards migration of the strong material of the backstop, which is then gradually weakened until it becomes part of the frontal prism. As the process continues, material that was once part of the strong backstop is eventually eroded away24. On the mid to upper continental slope (Fig. 1 item d), high-angle, landwards-dipping normal faults (Fig. 1 item e) with small to moderate ~50–300-m displacements can herald the impending fracturing of the rock framework24,27.

The frontal prism can reduce the plate-boundary friction by ‘loading’ (that is, overpressuring) fluid-rich sediments. Dewatering and upwards fluid migration results in weakening of the upper plate and upwards migration of the plate-boundary shear zone24. The consequent incorporation of upper-plate material to the top of the subduction channel (Fig. 1 item f) causes basal erosion. In addition, fluid percolation assists fracturing at the base of the upper plate, beneath the middle continental slope, and, thus, incorporation of this upper-plate material into the subduction channel (Fig. 1 item g). The thinner the incoming sediments, the higher the plate-boundary friction and, therefore, the fracturing of the upper plate24. The physical damage to the forearc is at a maximum when seamounts, oceanic plateaux and ridges on the lower plate collide with the forearc8,27. Material entering the subduction channel is likely to be accommodated by grabens and half-grabens (Fig. 1 item h) that dissect the lower plate.

If the eroded crust escapes immediate re-accretion (that is, underplating) beneath the forearc, it will be transported into the mantle alongside the downgoing plate. Fluids released from the lower plate are absorbed by the forearc mantle wedge, forming serpentinite. As mantle-wedge temperatures rise with increasing distance from the trench, release of fluids from the slab (Fig. 1 item i) and/or resulting serpentinites could trigger melting at slab depths >80–100 km (refs48,49). With increasing slab depth, the efficiency of material transfer from the slab to the wedge increases, owing to the buoyant rise of slab diapirs50,51,52 (Fig. 1 item k) or, if the slab solidus is intersected beneath the arc front, slab partial melts53.

Diapirs rising from the subducting slab transfer large volumes of low-density crustal material, such as eroded crust or sediment, into the core of the mantle wedge50. Additionally, mélange diapirs (Fig. 1 item l), which rise from intensely sheared and mixed, high-pressure mélange zones between the eclogitic slab and overlying mantle peridotite, can integrate the bulk of the AOC, instead of only low-mass AOC fluids, into the core of the mantle wedge33,51,54,55. As the rising slab material mixes with the hot core of the mantle wedge, it will begin to melt (alongside the surrounding mantle peridotite) and, subsequently, erupt as arc magmas after ascent through the crustal basement (Fig. 1 item m). The residual slab material is then exported to the deeper mantle (Fig. 1 item n).

Discovering subduction erosion
Subduction erosion cannot be directly observed or quantified. Instead, the process of subduction erosion, and the rate of crustal destruction, can be inferred from a combination of geological and geophysical forearc observations1,9,10,20,23,56,57.

Characteristic features of upper-plate destruction, such as forearc thinning or truncation, can also be caused by extension or the presence of strike-slip faults parallel to the trench. However, where subduction erosion is inferred (Fig. 2 and Supplementary Information), it is the only process that can account for the entirety of the observations, which implies net loss of forearc material. In addition, subduction erosion provides a framework for quantifying forearc crustal loss.

Destruction of the upper-plate crust
Early evidence for the importance of subduction erosion comes from the large-scale loss of forearc crust at convergent margins58,59,60,61,62. For example, the 200-km landwards migration of the active central and southern Andean volcanic arc (~15–46°S), evidenced by the eastwards younging remnants of older arcs located between the coast and the Holocene arc58, indicates that there has been time-progressive destruction of the Andean forearc crust since the Early Jurassic1,58. At different arc systems worldwide, evidence for forearc loss includes the missing portions of accretionary prisms (for example, in Nankai)63, unaccountable forearc subsidence in Japan64 and Costa Rica25,26, truncation of the crystalline roots of older magmatic belts near the shoreline and offshore (as in the Mexican Pacific coast)65,66 or the testimony of detrital zircon chronology that records the existence of now-vanished Paleozoic and Mesozoic batholiths of the proto-Japan arc67.

Major strike-slip faults have also been suggested to cause large-scale forearc loss. However, along-trench transport of the forearc by trench-parallel strike-slip faults would generate doubled-up forearcs in addition to forearc loss, which are not observed. Instead, in the late 1970s, ocean drilling revealed the presence of forearc subsidence64,68. For example, drilling ~90 km from the trench axis offshore Japan, in water 1,560 m deep, penetrated an erosional angular unconformity 1,200 m below the seafloor, which could be seismically traced regionally to ~10 km from the trench axis. The sediments above the unconformity are 48 m thick, unconsolidated, non-marine Oligocene, which were interpreted as nearshore/beach deposits64. Thus, since the Oligocene, broad, regional outer-forearc subsidence of nearly 2,800 m, at a rate of ~140 m per Myr (ref.64), must have occurred to accommodate the burial of these subaerial sediments beneath the overlying marine-slope sediments1.

In a simple model of an accretionary prism, subsidence of the outer forearc is unexpected, as plate convergence and underthrusting should result in isostatic uplift of the prism’s outer slope, owing to thickening of lower-density crustal material69,70. However, forearc subsidence can also result from changes in slab dip71,72,73,74, crustal thinning by forearc extension or basal erosion. Although normal, extensional faults are found in erosive margins24, their displacement and resulting crustal thinning cannot account for the measured forearc subsidence26,64. For example, there are no major extensional structures large enough to explain the ~3,000 m of subsidence in the Japan outer forearc64,75,76. In addition, models that consider the subsidence of the outer Japan forearc to be driven by variations in plate kinematics, associated with the post-Oligocene opening of the Japan Sea77,78, assume that there has been a constant forearc volume since the Oligocene. Yet, the Oligocene outer-forearc volume, inferred from the upper-plate cross-sectional area between the trench and the drilled Oligocene coastline, only accounts for about 25% of the modern outer-forearc volume, which is inconsistent with constant-volume models.

Subsequent work has documented large-scale and long-lived subsidence in other forearcs1,10, such as Costa Rica, where multibeam bathymetry provided spectacular images of the visual damage to the forearc by the head-on collision of incoming high-relief seamounts. Seamounts plough through the frontal prism and leave grooved, elongate depressions in the forearc slope up to ~55 km landwards24,27,79, indicating that seamount subduction is able to effectively remove fragmented upper-plate material24.

To the south, subduction of the aseismic Cocos Ridge, a ~18-km-thick and ~200-km-wide basaltic ridge80 that rises ~2,000 m high above the surrounding seafloor (Fig. 2), is associated with the landwards retreat of the Middle America Trench81,82. Ocean drilling indicates ~1 km of uplift of the forearc continental shelf within only ~0.3 Myr, starting at ~2 ± 0.2 million years ago (Ma), which was followed by equally fast subsidence of ~1.5 km (refs8,81,83). The rapid vertical motion of the forearc, and retreat of the trench, suggests that the onset of Cocos Ridge subduction caused accelerating compression, followed by outer-forearc removal and thinning by basal erosion8,84.

An alternative hypothesis states that the arrival of the Cocos Ridge at the trench would cause horizontal shortening and thickening of the forearc, without mass loss, and, thus, trench retreat. In this model, the subduction of a much smaller seamount is required to explain the initial, rapid vertical forearc movements82,85. However, contemporaneous thickening and subsidence of the outer forearc is required82,85, inconsistent with the isostatic uplift predicted following subduction of a ~18-km-thick basaltic ridge.

As a result, time-progressive forearc destruction by basal erosion1,8 represents the only process that can explain the observed subsidence of forearcs worldwide and the volumes of crustal forearc that are lost. In addition, subduction erosion is consistent with several forearc features that have been revealed by seismic images, such as the existence of frontal prisms in Costa Rica and Guatemala24 (Fig. 1), high-angle normal faulting patterns on the continental slope of Costa Rica, Nicaragua and South America27, mega-lenses of upper-plate material embedded in the subduction channel in Costa Rica27,86 and the upper plate imbricates landwards-dipping forearc thrusts that are truncated by plate-boundary shear zones in the Japan Trench75. Additionally, high-temperature (~85–150 °C) vents located along forearc normal faults document the upwards fluid drainage from the lower plate that causes the subsurface hydrofracturing of the rock framework87.

Although the volume of forearc data available for the Central American margin is rarely seen elsewhere8 (see Supplementary Information), sufficient observations exist to demonstrate that erosive destruction of the upper plate is a common consequence of plate convergence9. By contrast, the hydrated, less brittle lower plate largely escapes physical destruction, except for the loss of the incoming sediment that is accreted to the forearc (~70% on average; see Supplementary Information).

Eroded crustal volumes
The influence of subduction erosion on the solid-rock geochemical cycle is controlled by the rate of forearc erosion, or forearc volume lost, within a given time span. Erosion rates are estimated through reconstruction of the volume lost using data on the forearc crustal thickness, the extent and duration of forearc subsidence, and the rate of landwards trench migration9,10,26 (Supplementary Information).

As the capacity of the subduction channel to consume eroded material is a function of several parameters, including the topography of the incoming plate, the convergence rate and the hydrogeology of the forearc and plate boundary88,89,90, erosion rates can be difficult to constrain in the highly dynamic forearc environment. For example, the subduction channel might widen at depth and, thus, allow more eroded material to enter the plate-boundary shear zone, or shrink, causing underplating down to at least ~30–40 km depth (as imaged by reflection and refraction seismic profiles and inferred from telltale forearc uplifts)91,92,93. As a result, a single margin might display along-strike changes from an erosive to an accretionary and underplating regime8,94,95. Similarly, a margin with a large, long-lived accretionary prism can turn erosive, removing the accreted material by frontal erosion93.

The classification of a given margin as erosive or accretionary typically represents a time-integrated, long-term average7,9 (Fig. 2). As forearc data improve, the rates of forearc erosion are constantly revised. The most up-to-date estimates of the rates of forearc erosion and sediment subduction, calibrated on Pliocene–Pleistocene (≤5 Ma) geophysical and geological forearc data and the tectonic background of the modern subduction zones, are presented in the Supplementary Information. Critically, the new rates are the first that have been adjusted for sediment loss by underplating and forearc accretion, and confirm that most margins (>60%) are erosive (consistent with earlier compilations)1,9,10.

Erosive and accretionary margins can also have distinctive forearc characteristics9. Accretionary margins are characterized by lower (orthogonal) convergence rates (~36 ± 22 km per Myr) and higher sediment fluxes (trench fill >1 km thick). They are commonly found near continents and large river mouths that have had a high terrigenous sediment flux through the Cenozoic6,9 and, in particular, since the onset of the Northern Hemisphere glaciation at ~2.6 Ma (ref.1). Frontal prisms constructed from accreted sediments tend to have shallow forearc slopes <3° and taper angles <10° (the angle between the subducting slab surface and forearc slope). By contrast, erosive margins have higher convergence rates (~71 ± 23 km per Myr) and thin (<1 km) trench fills. Their forearcs are built of stronger lithified sediments, magmatic and crystalline rocks with steeper slopes (>3° and 8°), and bigger taper angles (>7° up to 20°)8,9.

The dominance of erosive margins implies a global net loss of forearc, especially since mass balances point towards forearc loss even at accretionary margins64,94,96. However, the volumes of eroded crust at accretionary margins are difficult to estimate56,95 and, as a result, global averages of erosion rates are currently based on estimates from erosive margins1,7. Despite the inherent uncertainties and data gaps, some important features emerge. First, the most recent estimates of the average global erosion rates (~66 ± 34 km3 per km of trench length per Myr (km3/km/Myr); Supplementary Information) are higher than the early estimates of ~26 km3/km/Myr (ref.1), owing to the improved quality and quantity of forearc data. Second, once the influence of crustal underplating is taken into account, the estimated rate of sediment subduction decreases from the early estimates of ~23 km3/km/Myr (ref.1), or ~41–45 km3/km/Myr if 100% sediment subduction at erosive margins is assumed, to ~14 ± 8 km3/km/Myr. Third, all estimates agree that tectonically eroded crust contributes at least half, and likely up to ~80%, of the total crust lost to mantle through trench sediment and subduction erosion (~77–81  km3/km/Myr)1,7,9,10. Fourth, the combined rate of crust loss via sediment subduction and forearc erosion is similar to the estimated global arc crust production rate by melting of the mantle, which is usually estimated to be ~30–150 km3/km/Myr (refs1,7,9,10). As a result, tectonically eroded crust should influence arc volcanism5, mantle evolution5 and, also, models of continental-crust destruction and growth7,97.

Connecting subduction erosion and arcs
Arc magmas have radiogenic isotope ratios (that is, 87Sr/86Sr, 206Pb/204Pb, 206Pb/204Pb, 206Pb/204Pb, 143Nd/144Nd and 176Hf/177Hf) that are intermediate between those of the depleted upper mantle and the enriched continental crust3,31. For example, the 143Nd/144Nd ratios of arc magmas (expressed as εNd) are lower than that of the depleted upper mantle (εNd = ~10), but typically higher than that of continental crust (εNd < 0)5,98,99. A simple, first-order assumption is that eroded crust resembles continental crust in major elements, trace elements and radiogenic isotope ratios1,7,20. As a result, it has been suggested that the εNd of primary arc magmas should scale to the total amount of continental crust (trench sediment + eroded crust) recycled beneath each arc7. The proportion of eroded crust involved in the petrogenesis of arc magmas can then be determined through the ratio of eroded crust to subducted trench sediment calculated from forearc observations7. As tectonically eroded crust contributes substantially to the total subducted crust (~75% on average, Supplementary Information), low-εNd arcs should contain the largest contribution of recycled eroded crust.

A global map of arc εNd (Fig. 2), however, does not support such a simple compositional link between the rate of subduction erosion and arc magma compositions. Although volcanoes of the Central Volcanic Zone (CVZ, ~15–28°S) and the Southern Volcanic Zone (SVZ, ~33–46°S) have low average εNd signatures of −5 and +4, respectively, consistent with the long-term erosional history of the margin1, εNd is high in other erosional margins (>+5). For example, εNd values up to +7 and +9 are observed in the Costa Rica and Tonga arcs, where subduction of the Cocos and Louisville Ridges, respectively, increase forearc erosion1,8. In fact, in both locations, arc εNd values reach maxima at the intersection of ridge and forearc, which points to the erosion recycling of the high-εNd crustal-forearc basement.

The often-made assumption that subduction erosion only recycles continental crust is an oversimplification. Instead, as expected from the location of active subduction zones, forearc erosion may abrade any material that builds forearc basement, which can include upper continental crust, depleted or enriched oceanic crust, accreted sediments, allochthonous terranes or the poorly characterized lower continental crust. In an endmember scenario, erosion recycling of various crustal materials could produce the global distribution of εNd in arc magmas. In addition, erosion recycling likely contributes to the highly heterogeneous nature of the mantle by recycling materials other than continental crust100, oceanic lithosphere101 and AOC102.

There are, however, other factors that can influence the εNd of global arc magmas. For example, crustal assimilation can systematically lower the εNd of arcs constructed on ancient continental basement relative to the εNd of oceanic arcs40,103. Arc εNd might also be influenced by variations in the mantle-wedge composition, which appears to be more depleted beneath oceanic arcs104 than continental arcs105,106,107. Chemical variety can also be introduced by variations in the amount and composition of trench sediment3,13,31,108,109. To distinguish between the different possibilities, comprehensive major-element, trace-element and isotope studies from the trench, forearc, arc basement and arc magmas are needed in individual arc settings. Modelling of such datasets, supported by experimental data, can determine whether forearc recycling controls arc magma composition or is subordinate to the other processes.

Case studies in volcanic arcs
It is a formidable challenge to distinguish and quantify the contribution of an eroded crustal component, of unknown composition, to arc magmas, especially owing to the influence of other co-mingled source components. The debate surrounding the contribution of eroded forearc crust to arc magma petrogenesis in several arc systems worldwide illustrates the challenge.

The Central and Southern Andean arc
There is strong geological evidence for subduction erosion along the Andean margin between Peru and South Chile (~10–46°S). For example, large-scale crustal loss, forearc subsidence1 and characteristic fault patterns110 have led several studies to consider the influence of recycled eroded forearc on Andean arc magmas19,20,111. For example, an early study indicated that the increase in the 87Sr/86Sr of Holocene Andean arc magmas north of ~34°S was causally related to a contextual increase of ongoing subduction erosion112. However, subsequent studies of the Andean arc’s Cenozoic evolution inferred that erosion recycling was not continuous but episodic19,113,114,115.

In the Andean CVZ and SVZ, the compositional evolution of the arc between the Oligocene (~25 Ma) and present day can be reconstructed from the remnants of the older arcs. The older arcs are exposed between the coast and the Holocene arc in trench-parallel, eastwards younging volcanic belts that were left behind as the Andean volcanic front retreated to the east58. The exposed compositional evolution of the Andean arc allow the identification of two Neogene periods (~19–16 Ma and ~8–3 Ma) that are characterized by the presence of small-volume, primitive arc magmas that have up to 700 ppm Cr, 300 ppm Ni and 10 wt% MgO (refs19,113,114), as well as steep rare-earth element (REE) patterns and high Sr/Y, Sr/Yb and Sm/Yb ratios that are characteristic of adakitic magmas. The lower εNd and higher 87Sr/86Sr of the adakitic magmas, compared with their preceding magmas, points to an origin from an enriched mantle source19,113.

The two Neogene pulses coincide with periods of heightened eastwards arc retreat, a change from an extensional to a compressional basement regime, crustal thickening and a decrease in the volcanic productivity of the eastwards-migrating volcanic arc19,113,116. At a constant subduction geometry, accelerated arc retreat points to enhanced tectonic forearc erosion, which can cause mantle-wedge enrichment through the incorporation of the subducted eroded crust19,113,114. In addition, similar chemo-temporal correlations were observed in the Central Aleutian arc, where adakitic magmas preferentially erupt during peaks of forearc erosion and arc retreat (~7–5 Ma) or in the waning stages of short-term enhanced magmatic activity (~37–29 Ma, ~16–11 Ma and ~7–5 Ma)117,118.

The combination of adakitic signatures, crustal thickening and tectonic evolution has also been hypothesized to be driven by crustal thickening, rather than enhanced subduction erosion. Crustal thickening stalls the underlying mantle flow field, which, in turn, forces the arc front to migrate away from the trench119 and causes an increase in trace-element ratios, such as La/Yb. However, although there is strong evidence for fluctuations between extensional and compressional upper-plate regimes in the Andean SVZ since the Miocene120, tectonically driven crustal thickening cannot account for the large-scale loss of forearc crust along the Andean margin, the presence of older arc products at the coast and forearc subsidence110.

Intriguingly, in the Andean subduction erosion model presented above, compositional links between the forearc and arc are only visible in rare, periodic, small-volume mafic magmas19,113, which implies that most of the eroded material must be returned to the mantle19,113. However, the question of whether strong arc–forearc compositional links are present outside of the two Neogene periods of adakitic magmatism remains debated.

A recent study of the northern SVZ (~34–35°S) used Sr–Nd–Pb isotopes and incompatible trace-element ratios to suggest that primitive, high-Mg# arc magmas are sourced from a mantle that contains an enriched, low-εNd, upper-crustal component111. Isotope mixing systematics rule out a substantial contribution from low-εNd trench sediment and instead point to a low-εNd, upper-continental-crust component that was recycled by forearc erosion111,121. However, the role of subduction erosion on controlling the composition of Andean arc magmas was recently challenged by a study that approximated the composition of the SVZ and CVZ Andean eroded forearc crust though a compilation of published data from the outcropping igneous and metamorphic Andean basement122. No basement composition found in the compilation was able to recreate the Sr, Ba, Eu/Eu* and 87Sr/86Sr systematics of mafic rocks from Maipo and Don Casimiro in the SVZ (~34.16°S)122, a volcanic system that had previously been connected with erosion recycling111. Similar ambiguity is also present in two CVZ volcanoes near ~28°S, ~700 km farther to the north, which show consistency with erosion recycling in the Sr–Nd isotope space, but a clear signal of crustal contamination in their Pb-isotope compositions114.

The crustal proxies used in studies of the CVZ114,123 and SVZ19,40 represent the accessible upper Phanerozoic Andean crust. However, the deep Andean basement between Colombia and Patagonia is composed of various Grenvillian-age (1–1.5 billion years ago) crustal terranes124. Assimilation of the inaccessible deep crustal basement40,125 by either crustal contamination or tectonic erosion of the deeper Andean forearc basement19,113 is imaginable but difficult to test in the face of the rare inliers of Grenvillian-age crust.

Further complexity is introduced into the petrogenesis of the Andean arc magmas by the possible presence of an enriched mantle, low-εNd component in the mantle wedge. The enriched mantle component is hypothesized to be either low-εNd subcontinental lithospheric mantle107 or components derived from it105. In such a scenario, the low εNd of the mafic CVZ and SVZ magmas is not related to subduction erosion123 but originates from a heterogeneous mantle that is transported by corner flow126 from behind the arc to the arc front (where it is overprinted by low-mass slab fluids)105,122,127,128,129. Thus, to fully understand the influence of subduction erosion on Andean magmatism over time, the challenge remains to find means of quantitatively distinguishing between contributions from mantle, deep crustal basement and forearc to the composition of arc-front magmas.

The Central American Volcanic Arc
The Central American Volcanic Arc (CAVA) (Fig. 2) is a well-studied, long-term Neogene erosive system130. Multiple ocean drilling expeditions on the forearc reveal that the forearc-erosion rate increased from ~12 to 80 km3/km/Myr between ~6 and ~2.5 Ma, and then to ~140–153 km3/km/Myr in the Pleistocene. In addition, a regional Pleistocene maximum forearc-erosion rate of ~1,125 km3/km/Myr (ref.130) is observed at the intersection of the forearc with the aseismic Cocos Ridge, which arrived at the trench at ~2.5 Ma and represents oceanic crust that has been thickened from ~6 to ~18 km (ref.80) by Galapagos hotspot magmatism81,131.

Concurrent with increasing forearc erosion between ~6 and 1.5 Ma, the CAVA magmas in central Costa Rica and western Panama transitioned from normal calc-alkaline arc magmas to enriched, ‘ocean island basalt (OIB)-type’ magmas that resemble, in some trace-element and isotope ratios, the intraplate magmas of the Galapagos hotspot131,132,133. The temporal change in the magmatic compositions of the CAVA could be related to the onset of recycling of the Cocos Ridge at ~2.5 Ma (ref.81). However, the contribution of eroded forearc crust to the CAVA magmas remains unclear.

It has been suggested that subduction erosion could transfer the OIB-type Pb isotope signatures to the arc from a forearc that is constructed of accreted OIB-type Cretaceous ophiolites and fragments of the Caribbean large igneous province133. However, several other models have been proposed to explain the OIB-type Pb isotope signature of the CAVA magmas, including advection of enriched mantle by trench-parallel flow beneath the CAVA134; a slab window allowing Galapagos asthenosphere to flow into the mantle wedge135; a mantle wedge infested with Galapagos plume components136; and a mantle wedge metasomatized by slab components from subducted Galapagos-type oceanic crust132,137. Thus, the Pleistocene–Holocene CAVA provides an example of a forearc–arc setting where eroded forearc might be recycled, but the influence of the recycled eroded crust on arc magma petrogenesis cannot be determined, owing to the compositional diversity of the source components that might be present.

The Trans-Mexican Volcanic Belt
The Trans-Mexican Volcanic Belt (TMVB) allows the influence of erosion recycled to be directly tested, as it has an accessible and distinct trench and forearc input17,18,138, and a well-investigated arc output139. In addition, the composition of the ambient mantle wedge can be approximated through contemporaneous rear-arc magmas that erupt directly behind the volcanic front140,141.

The crystalline roots of deeply eroded, older Mesozoic–Cenozoic arcs are commonly uplifted above sea level along the Pacific coast65,66 and their sharp truncation indicates that substantial tectonic removal of the Mexican forearc has occurred142. In addition, along the north-west coastal segment, forearc loss by subduction erosion is strongly supported by observed subsidence9, arc retreat and forearc uplift66,142,143,144,145. To the south-east, truncation of the Mexican margin might have been enhanced since at least the early Miocene by the left-lateral translation of a large crustal basement block (‘Chortis block’) from southern Mexico to its present position in Central America146,147,148,149. Therefore, the contribution of recycled, eroded crust to the composition of the Pliocene-Quaternary TMVB arc magmas is likely.

The TMVB produces high-Mg# basalts and andesites with up to 600 ppm Cr and 280 ppm Ni (ref.139). The presence of high-Ni olivines (up to 5,400 ppm Ni) with mantle-like 3He/4He signatures (7–8 Ra)150 indicate that the TMVB magmas undergo negligible contamination during passage through the ~30–50-km-thick continental basement139,151. Intriguingly, olivines with the mantle-like 3He/4He ratios also have high, crustal δ18O signatures (+5.6 to +6.6‰; Fig. 3a,b), which points towards the contribution of slab-derived continental crustal material to the TMVB mantle wedge18.

Fig. 3: Geochemical variations of global arcs with details from the Trans-Mexican Volcanic Belt.
figure3
a | εNd vs εHf of the Trans-Mexican Volcanic Belt (TMVB) (n = 598)229, global arc data (grey, n = 4,742)229, the Mexican forearc crust17,18 and average trench sediment (brown diamond)156. b | 3He/4He (Ra) versus δ18O (‰) of olivine phenocrysts from a subgroup of TMVB basalts and andesites. Combined high, mantle-like 3He/4He (~7–8 Ra) and high crustal δ18O (>5.4 ‰) indicates that the melt originated from a mantle infiltrated by crustal slab components18. c | Mixing systematics in εNd–εHf space. Curved (A) vs straight (B) trends resulting from mixing of endmember with similar εNd and εHf but different Nd/Hf ratios. C, crust with low Nd/Hf (such as continental crust or unradiogenic intraplate crust); M, mantle; MORB, mid-ocean ridge basalt; S, trench sediment; Terres. array, terrestrial array. Adapted with permission from ref.18, Elsevier.

Full size image
Contribution of recycled continental crust to the TMVB mantle wedge is also consistent with the radiogenic isotope and trace-element systematics of the TMVB arc magmas. Regardless of being erupted from large-volume composite (several hundreds of km3) or small monogenetic centres (<1 km3), the TMVB magmas form tight, linear arrays in radiogenic isotope space that are bracketed by forearc and/or trench lithologies and the composition of the TMVB mantle wedge18,138,152. In addition, the isotopic arrays of the TMVB magmas cut through the much broader spectrum of isotopic compositions measured in the TMVB continental basement, which varies widely in thickness, composition and age139,153,154,155.

Critically, the Nd–Hf isotope and trace-element systematics of the TMVB arc magmas exclude the trench sediment as an important endmember in magma petrogenesis18. The trench sediment has a high Nd/Hf ratio of ~17 (ref.156); however, the linear TMVB array in εNd–εHf space requires that all slab components have a low Nd/Hf ratio of ~4–5, similar to the mantle wedge (Fig. 3). Recycled mid-ocean ridge basalt type AOC has a low Nd/Hf ratio (~4–5) but has a similarly high εNd–εHf to the mantle wedge18. Thus, the low-εNd–εHf eroded forearc crust with a low Nd/Hf ratio of ~5 is the only possible unradiogenic endmember of the TMVB array. If recycled in sufficient quantities, the eroded crust will be able to conceal the signature of the subducted trench sediment in the TMVB magmas17,18 (that is, a curved isotopic mixing trend in εNd–εHf space; Fig. 3).

Comparison of along-strike radiogenic isotope trends in the arc and forearc have recently been used to further investigate the influence of erosion recycling in the TMVB, testing the hypothesis that the composition of the arc volcanics should reflect the parallel trend of the respective forearc lithologies17. The forearc trend was reconstructed through river-mouth sediments at the Pacific coast, which are lithological composites of larger, but regionally limited, catchment areas17. Critically, the along-strike trends observed in the forearc data are similar to the parallel trends of major andesitic volcanoes (Sangangüey, Tequila, Colima), consistent with a compositional control by forearc-crust recycling17 (Fig. 4).

Fig. 4: Arc and forearc compositional variations in the western Trans-Mexican Volcanic Belt.
figure4
Data are presented from the andesite volcanoes Sangangüey, Tequila and Colima and forearc lithologies (river-mouth sediments and bedrock). Forearc lithologies include the Late Cretaceous Puerto Vallarta Batholith (PVB, ~82 Ma) and coeval rhyolites (R), the Manzanillo batholith (MS, ~73 Ma) and the Paleocene Jilotlán batholith (JP ~58 Ma), which intrude Early Cretaceous rocks and associated volcano-sedimentary sequences (VS) and Paleocene felsic plutonic rocks (FP). Coloured, stippled lines represent the trajectories followed by subducted material. EPR, East Pacific Rise. Adapted with permission from ref.17, Geological Society of America.

Full size image
Further evidence for erosion recycling in the TMVB emerges from zircons in a Holocene andesite lava flow from the summit of Malinche, a major stratovolcano of the eastern TMVB138 (Fig. 5). The cores of the zircons have a Paleoproterozoic to Miocene age distribution that is inconsistent with the Ordovician to Jurassic ages and polydeformed metamorphic lithologies of the deep crustal basement beneath Malinche157 (indicating that they are not assimilated during passage through the crust). However, the zircon age distribution is remarkably similar to that of detrital zircons in crustal sediments from the Papagayo River, which drains into the Pacific where the trajectory of the slab subducting beneath Malinche intersects the trench, and from a hemipelagic mud unit recovered offshore at Deep Sea Drilling Project Site 467, <100 km to the south-east of Papagayo’s river mouth (Fig. 5). As such, the Malinche zircon cores could be unmolten residues of eroded forearc crust that survived burial, erosion, subduction and ascent from the slab in comparatively cool silicic mélange diapirs that traverse through a hot mantle wedge (>1,000 °C), to eventually reappear as rare xenocrysts in the Malinche magmas138.

Fig. 5: U–Pb dating of Malinche zircons.
figure5
a | U–Pb concordia diagram of Malinche zircons compared with detrital zircons from the Papagayo River and a Pliocene–Quaternary, 182-m-thick hemipelagic grey mud unit of 0–5 million years ago (Ma) drilled at Deep Sea Drilling Project (DSDP) Site 487 (near the trench). Data point error ellipses at the 2σ level. Numbers along the lines (500, 1000, and 1500 labels) denote age in millions of years. Constructed with IsoplotR232. b | Cathodoluminescence images of Malinche’s zircon xenocrysts, with 238U/206Pb ages in Ma. Inherited cores of Proterozoic and Paleozoic age (red) are overgrown by effectively zero-age (<2 Ma) rims (green), which grew in Quaternary Malinche magmas. mbsf, metres below the seafloor. Adapted with permission from ref.138, Elsevier.

Full size image
Overall, the TMVB displays the best evidence for the contribution of tectonically eroded crust to arc magma petrogenesis. The apparent presence of eroded forearc crust in all major TMVB magmas series indicates that erosion recycled might widely affect global arc magmas17,18.

Summary and future perspectives
Subduction erosion is a common process in subduction zones and is responsible for the removal of large volumes of crust from the upper-plate forearc. The volumes of eroded crust are so large that they must factor into the perpetual cycle of crustal destruction through subduction and new crust formation from the mantle as strongly as the subduction of AOC, trench sediment and hydrated mantle. In this Review, we have shown that integrated trench–forearc–arc studies at convergent margins, where eroded crust is formed and subducted, are crucial in determining the volume and composition of eroded material. However, although case studies provide strong arguments for the importance of erosion recycling, many questions still remain. Specifically, ongoing work continues to highlight several areas of research that need to be targeted in future studies to further explore and investigate the influence of erosion recycling at convergent margins.

Forearc exploration
Establishing compositional connections between the arc and forearc provides key evidence for erosion recycling in arcs. The TMVB highlights what can be achieved in a favourable setting, whereas the Andean SVZ and CVZ demonstrate the issues that can arise if critical lithologies are not available or indistinct in composition. Future studies of the compositional variations along an arc and forearc must take into account the greater compositional variability of the forearc compared with the incoming plate. As a result, more sampling sites along the forearc are required to test along-strike arc–forearc correlation. Pilot studies could be used to identify the potential of possible study areas. In addition, drilling to the zones of active subduction erosion, which is now technically possible158, could help characterize the age, composition and origin of the eroding lithologies and, thus, improve constraints on the mechanism and rates of forearc erosion8.

The origin of arc andesites
Current estimates for the proportion of recycled, eroded crust contributing to arc magmas range from a few (~2–6) percent in the Andean and Aleutian arcs19,111,113,117,133 to several tens (~20–50) of percent in the TMVB17,18,159,160. A low percent contribution of eroded crust to arc magmas implies that the subducted, eroded crust is mostly returned to the deep mantle1 and new arc crust is primarily extracted from mantle105,107,161. However, a high percent contribution implies a more balanced distribution of eroded crust between the shallow arc and the deeper mantle, and indicates that new arc crust might be partially rebuilt from subducted, eroded crust17.

The disparity in the numbers estimated for the contribution of eroded crust to arc magmas is dependent on the arc genetic model employed and, more specifically, on the long-standing problem of whether primary arc magmas are basaltic or silicic150,162,163,164,165,166,167. Primary arc basalts (MgO ≥ 10 wt%; Mg# ≥ 72)168, and high-Mg# andesites that form by hydrous mantle melting169,170,171, contain only a few percent of slab materials (eroded crust + AOC + trench sediment) prior to crustal differentiation. However, in primary andesitic and dacitic (that is, silicic) melts that erupt with little need for additional crustal differentiation, the contribution of slab material can be much larger17,150,164,172,173.

Few arc magmas display the steep, heavy REE patterns and high Sr/Y and Sr/Yb ratios that are considered characteristic of melts from a garnet-bearing source, which precludes global arc magmas originating from silicic partial melts of the subducting eclogitic slab174,175. However, in recent years, two models have been proposed that aim to explain the formation of primary silicic magmas (that is, andesites to dacites) that are rich in slab material but do not have a ‘garnet signature’. The first model proposes that reactive infiltration of silicic slab melts into the peridotite mantle wedge, producing secondary, silica-oversaturated pyroxenite segregations150, which then produce primary silicic melts upon melting at shallower levels in the mantle wedge176,177. Formation of mantle pyroxenite consumes tens of percent of silicic slab material and results in the presence of melts that contain contributions from both slab and mantle, in which only a few elements, such as Mg, Fe, Ti and the telltale heavy REE, remain mantle-controlled150,159,160,178. This process could create high-Mg# andesites150 independent from melt water content in all arc settings, such as the TMVB139, Kamchatka179,180,181, New Zealand182,183,184, the Western Aleutians185 and the Cascades186,187,188,189.

The second model that has been proposed builds on the idea of slab diapirs and mélanges50,51,190,191, which are predicted to buoyantly rise from a layer of silicic, low-density crustal material on top of the slab, between the dense eclogitic below and mantle peridotite above50,51. Silicic diapirs can either rise to the base of the crust where they relaminate190,191 or erupt as arc magmas after reactive interaction and melting in the mantle wedge17,18,138. Slab diapirs transfer a substantial mass of bulk crust to the wedge and can include elements not mobilized in slab partial melts, such as Fe, Mg and Ti from granodiorites18 or as part of ‘mélange diapirs’ that contain mafic material from the AOC33,54,55. The compositional consequences of slab or mélange diapirs for arc magmas has only recently begun to be explored17,18,33,51,55,138. Nevertheless, there is clear potential for the creation of an enriched, heterogeneous mantle that produces a diverse spectrum of basaltic and silicic primary arc melts with flat, heavy REE patterns17,18,172.

Importantly, a global evaluation of arc magma compositions does not support the traditional model of melt silica increase by crustal contamination, providing additional evidence for the presence of primary silicic magmas generated in the mantle wedge (Fig. 6). An increase in the silica content of a magma by incorporation of fusible, silicic upper-plate crust into hot basaltic mantle melts seems intuitive, especially given the strong and pervasive melt-mixing features observed in all arc magmas103,150,192,193,194,195,196,197,198,199. However, contrary to expectations, melt SiO2 contents do not correlate with radiogenic isotope ratios, such as 207Pb/204Pb, that are highly sensitive to assimilation of continental crust (Figs 6,7).

Fig. 6: Major element vs isotopic systematics of global arc magmas.
figure6
a | SiO2 wt% vs 207Pb/204Pb for global arc volcanic rocks (n = 3,683). A subset of six arcs is highlighted: Mexico, Central America (CA; Costa Rica, Nicaragua and El Salvador), Andean Southern Volcanic Zone (SVZ), Sunda, Banda and the Southern Antilles. Horizontal lines represent the average 207Pb/204Pb of an arc. b | Histogram of correlation coefficients for SiO2 vs 207Pb/204Pb from 38 arc segments229. All arc data are from ref.229.

Full size image
Fig. 7: Isotopic systematics of global arc magmas.
figure7
a | εNd vs εHf of global arc volcanic rocks of Quaternary age (n = 1,054) compared with mid-ocean ridge basalt (MORB)215, oceanic intraplate basalts216 and global trench sediments108. b | εNd vs εHf of global arcs with six arcs highlighted: Mexico, Central America (Costa Rica, Nicaragua and El Salvador), Andean Southern Volcanic Zone (SVZ), Sunda, Banda and the Southern Antilles. εHf is available for only ~22% of the samples for which εNd data are available. Notably, εHf is missing for some samples that have the lowest εNd values (−1.7 to −10.6) of any magmas from the Andean Central Volcanic Zone (CVZ). Red stippled lines indicate typical ‘curved’ mantle–sediment mixing trends. OIB, ocean island basalt. All arc data are from ref.229.

Full size image
It is possible that the isotope ratios of basaltic arc magmas, especially Pb isotopes, are fixed by small amounts of contamination in the deep crustal basement114,125,200. Basaltic melts might then evolve to silicic melts by closed-system fractional crystallization201 and mix by recharge mixing during polybaric, multistage melt ascent. Rigorous testing of arc input–output relationships, using microanalysis of crystalline phases (phenocrysts)159,180,195,202,203,204 and their melt inclusions205,206, is required to investigate the possible assimilation of additional components in the deep crust. However, detailed microbeam studies of phenocrysts in both the simple magma systems of monogenetic volcanoes160,207 and the complex systems of composite volcanoes198,199 have, so far, failed to reveal a co-genetic evolution from basalt to dacite. Instead, the observed melt diversity, as evidenced by the range of both phenocryst and bulk-rock compositions, has been attributed to the presence of multiple, basaltic to silicic, melt components in the subvolcanic plumbing system152,160,195,199,208,209. In some cases, the range of melt compositions that is present has been interpreted to represent primary melts from a heterogeneous mantle created by active subduction150.

Mantle-wedge heterogeneity
Aside from determining the contribution of crustal assimilation, another factor that influences the estimated contribution of subducted material to arc magmas is the composition of the ambient mantle wedge. Traditionally, the mantle wedge has been considered to represent depleted upper mantle210, which is actively enriched by subduction through addition of enriched slab components, including high-mass slab partial melts and diapirs13,18,31,111. However, it has recently been suggested that low-mass fractionated slab fluids added to an enriched, heterogeneous mantle can create similar trace-element and isotopic variations as strong subduction enrichment105,122,129.

Distinguishing between the presence of an inherent enriched component and contribution of recycled eroded crust is complicated105,127, owing to the similar composition of the source components involved in each model. For example, inherently enriched mantle (EM) is believed to form through the deep subduction of slab materials beyond the arc volcanic front and their integration into the sources of OIBs5,15,22,101.

EM1 and EM2, the two most common ‘flavours’ of enriched mantle in OIBs, have been related to the deep recycling of eroded crust21,22,100 and sediment5,15, respectively (although EM1-type mantle has also been connected with the metasomatized subcontinental lithosphere)101,105,107,129,211. Nd and Hf are largely immobile in slab fluids but sensitive to the contribution of slab materials recycled via partial melts13,31 and diapirs17,18. As a result, Nd–Hf isotope and trace-element systematics should reveal whether EM-type magmas and arc magmas have a common mantle source. In a plot of εNd versus εHf, arc magmas fall into two groups (Fig. 7). One group, which is represented by only a few arcs (Sunda, Banda, southern Lesser Antilles and Luzon), forms concave, downwards-mixing trends between a radiogenic, depleted mantle and a low εNd–εHf crustal endmember (curve A in Fig. 3c). Arcs that fall into this first group also have high 207Pb/206Pb ratios (Fig. 6a), indicative of sediment recycling. Only clay-rich sediment with a high Nd/Hf > 10 (ref.156) can reproduce these curved trends13,18,212,213, given that the mantle has a low Nd/Hf of ~4–5 (ref.210).

Most arcs, such as the TMVB, Central American arc and the Andean SVZ, form straight arrays in εNd–εHf space (Fig. 7), which overlap with the composition of EM-type OIBs100 and are, thus, consistent with a common EM-type source105. However, the linear arrays displayed in εNd–εHf space by most arcs can also be explained by slab–mantle mixing in the active subduction regime, provided that the slab components share the low Nd/Hf ratio of the mantle (~5–6). A range of low-Nd/Hf slab components exist, including terrigenous trench sediment108,156, eroded continental rocks214 and mid-ocean ridge basalt and OIB-type oceanic crust215,216. As the high-Nd/Hf sediment subgroup6,156 has a clear influence on some arc magmas (Fig. 7a) and must be related to the presence of subduction materials, the ‘straight’ εNd–εHf arc trends are also likely to have a subduction origin.

The εNd–εHf trends observed in arc magma compositions are best revealed from unfiltered arc data. Filtering for mafic arc magmas (that is, those with MgO > 6 wt% or Mg# > 60) would remove ~70% of the arc εNd–εHf data and, thus, reduce the clarity of the mixing systematics. Considering unfiltered datasets implicitly assumes that there is no major influence of crustal contamination, consistent with the 207Pb/204Pb versus SiO2 trends (Fig. 6) and supported by the combined 3He/4He and δ18O systematics of the olivines from the TMVB18 (Fig. 3).

Future studies should focus on analysis of the cosmogenic isotope 10Be in arc magmas, as it is the only geochemical tracer that can conclusively distinguish a subduction-related input from inherent mantle enrichment. 10Be is formed by cosmic-ray spallation in the atmosphere29,217 and, owing to its short half-life of 1.5 Myr, it is enriched in upper marine sediments, but never in the mantle29. The presence of measurable 10Be in arc magmas proved sediment recycling beyond doubt2,218. 10Be is expensive and difficult to measure, yet, a detection in arcs may allow to test for links between an enrichment and slab processing, at least in those arcs where the transit time from trench to arc remains within the ≤6-Myr lifespan of 10Be (ref.29).

The influence of underlying mantle heterogeneity and/or eroded crust on arc magmas can also be tested through integrative and comprehensive geochemical analyses of a single-arc setting. Future studies of arcs and forearcs should make use of the available toolbox of geochemical tracers (that is, major and trace elements and Sr–Nd–Pb–Hf–He–O–Os–B–Be isotopes), as well as emerging new isotope tracers, such as 238U/235U (refs14,219), 205Tl/203Tl (ref.220) or 138Ce/142Ce (ref.221). Analysis of all endmember materials, including next to trench, forearc and arc lithologies, and rear-arc magmas, which may be considered free from subduction influence while still close enough to the active arc to approximate the regional ambient mantle105,127, must be considered. For example, rear-arc magmas of the TMVB141,222,223 have εNd values that are too radiogenic to account for the most unradiogenic TMVB magmas17,18,152,224,225, which confirms that the εNd–εHf systematics of the TMVB are controlled by forearc-crust recycling17,18. In the Andean SVZ, where rear-arc volcanism is abundant226,227,228, rear-arc and arc-front magmas have a similar range in εNd–εHf space, which seems to point to common, inherently enriched EM-type mantle source105,127,129. However, a larger dataset revealed that the SVZ arc-front and rear-arc magmas form two parallel trends in εNd–εHf space129, which indicates that the arc magmas are also influenced by active subduction recycling105.

We stress that regional-scale, multidisciplinary studies that integrate geological and geochemical data from the trench, forearc, arc and rear arc are needed to understand the impact of erosion recycling on volcanic arcs and, ultimately, its role in generating mantle heterogeneity, as well as growth and destruction of the continental crust.

Volcanoes are the main pathway to the surface for volatiles that are stored within the Earth. Carbon dioxide (CO2) is of particular interest because of its potential for climate forcing. Understanding the balance of CO2 that is transferred from the Earth’s surface to the Earth’s interior, hinges on accurate quantification of the long-term emissions of volcanic CO2 to the atmosphere. Here we present an updated evaluation of the world’s volcanic CO2 emissions that takes advantage of recent improvements in satellite-based monitoring of sulfur dioxide, the establishment of ground-based networks for semi-continuous CO2-SO2 gas sensing and a new approach to estimate key volcanic gas parameters based on magma compositions. Our results reveal a global volcanic CO2 flux of 51.3 ± 5.7 Tg CO2/y (11.7 × 1011 mol CO2/y) for non-eruptive degassing and 1.8 ± 0.9 Tg/y for eruptive degassing during the period from 2005 to 2015. While lower than recent estimates, this global volcanic flux implies that a significant proportion of the surface-derived CO2 subducted into the Earth’s mantle is either stored below the arc crust, is efficiently consumed by microbial activity before entering the deeper parts of the subduction system, or becomes recycled into the deep mantle to potentially form diamonds.

Introduction
Volcanism is the main pathway for the transfer of carbon and other volatiles stored in the deep Earth to the surface1,2. Volcanic carbon dioxide (CO2) is a key non-anthropogenic regulator of atmospheric CO2 levels and has, over geologic time scales, affected the evolution of Earth’s climate3,4,5. Quantifying the volcanic CO2 flux is an ongoing challenge for the volcano science community and was the primary driver for launching the Deep Earth Carbon Degassing (DCO-DECADE) initiative of the Deep Carbon Observatory. DCO-DECADE was first established in 2011 during IAVCEI Commission of the Chemistry of Volcanic Gases workshop in Kamchatka and has since provided unprecedented global coverage of volcanic gas emission and composition measurements through continuous monitoring and campaign efforts (https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Deep_Earth_Carbon_Degassing_Project).

Here we present the results of this initiative to date, providing a comprehensive assessment of the present-day (2005–2015) global volcanic CO2 flux to the atmosphere. We combine measured volcanic fluxes of sulfur dioxide (SO2) with measured or estimated C/S molar ratios to derive volcanic CO2 fluxes, as initially done by Allard et al.6 and Williams, et al.7. These data are then extrapolated to volcanoes world-wide. Our present update greatly benefits from recent advances in satellite data analysis and a global compilation of annual emissions measured by the Ozone Monitoring Instrument, OMI8, which provides SO2 flux data for numerous volcanoes simultaneously. This space-based record is complemented by and compared to ground-based SO2 flux data, particularly from the Network for Observation of Volcanic and Atmospheric Change NOVAC9, to obtain annual budgets of global volcanic SO2 emissions. At the same time, coverage of C/S ratios from degassing volcanoes has significantly improved with the ubiquitous deployment of Multicomponent Gas Analysis Systems (MultiGAS) providing such data over wide temporal and spatial scales10. We focus primarily on degassing from subaerial volcanic vents but we also include a preliminary evaluation of diffuse soil degassing from the volcanoes’ flanks or from active tectonic regions, which has been compiled in the Magmatic Degassing (MaGa) database (www.magadb.net) and just reported in Werner, et al.11.

Data and Method
Emissions from subaerial volcanoes with plumes were compiled and evaluated by the DCO-DECADE synthesis group to produce an updated and complete estimation of global volcanic SO2 and CO2 fluxes. Our compilation applies to approximately 900 volcanoes, listed by Syracuse and Abers12. Most of them are located in subduction zones and are documented for subduction-related geophysical parameters, which thus offers the opportunity to compare our results for volcanic output to subduction forcing functions. We also consider volcanoes not listed in Syracuse and Abers but documented for SO2 or CO2 fluxes, these being mainly from hot spot and continental rift localities.

The presented dataset includes volcanic emissions from both persistent strong emitters and discrete eruptions, but also provides new estimates for the emissions of  weak contributors. Strong emitters are defined as volcanoes that release greater than 0.014 TgSO2/y as detected by satellite. Emissions from erupting volcanoes are identified by using the Global Volcanism Program catalogue for eruptive activity between 2005 and 2017. Weak contributors have SO2 emissions below OMI’s detection limit (0.014 TgSO2/y8). The extrapolations to unmeasured volcanoes utilize new data on C/S ratios and a classification into magmatic and hydrothermal categories based on visual observations, volcano databases (predominantly from Smithsonian Institution’s Global Volcanism Program, 2013), field reports, and observations made by the authors. Note that while we report and discuss molar C/S ratios, we use mass ratios to compute CO2 mass fluxes from SO2 mass fluxes. The summary methodology of computing and extrapolating the fluxes is shown in Fig. 1.

Figure 1
figure1
Schematic diagram of how fluxes were calculated and estimated. Green fields indicate measured values, yellow fields indicate estimated or extrapolated values. Numbers are the results as discussed in text with final uncertainties.

Full size image
SO2 flux from strong emitters and during eruptions
Our compilation of SO2 flux data covers 11 years from 2005 to 2015 and uses information from long-term monitoring from space and ground, as well as short-term campaign data and reports from the literature. When contemporaneous satellite- and ground-based (long-term or campaign) data exist for the same volcano, we made a critical case-by-case selection of the best and most representative estimate of the annual emission, considering the coverage of each method, specific conditions of measurement and, in certain cases, the separation of the contributions from two neighboring volcanoes that cannot be separated by satellite observations alone. In 28 out 125 cases, ground-based measurements are the only measurements available and are used for the calculations. Therefore, in order to be internally consistent, we used satellite-based measurements where possible and ground-based measurements only when satellite observations were not available. From the OMI survey the global SO2 flux from persistent volcanic degassing in the period 2005–2015 is estimated as 23.2 ± 2 Tg SO2/y (±1 s.d.) for ~90 measured volcanoes (Table S1 and ref. 8). This includes SO2 from large emitters such as Anatahan (1335 t SO2/d or 0.5 Tg/y), Bagana (3775 t SO2/d or 1.4 Tg/y), Aoba (2870 t SO2/d or 1 Tg/y) and Manam (1484 t SO2/d or 0.5 Tg/y). Here we complement this satellite-based estimate of decadal emission data with data from the ground-based NOVAC SO2 flux network9,13 and from campaign-style measurements for the same 2005–2015 period. The SO2 flux obtained from ground-based measurements is 6.9 ± 0.8 Tg SO2/y for 66 volcanoes, some of which were simultaneously observed by OMI. Using the combination approach described above, we account for 125 individual volcanoes in persistent degassing which, altogether, produced 24.9 ± 2.3 Tg SO2/y in 2005–2015 (Table S1).

The SO2 flux released during explosive and effusive eruptions is also compiled in Table S1. The time period considered for eruptions extends from 2005 to 2017 and is based on the SO2 climatology produced by NASA (https://so2.gsfc.nasa.gov/index.html). During this 13-year time period eruptions from 89 volcanoes were observed and emitted a total of 33.3 Tg SO2. This corresponds to an average global eruptive flux of 2.6 Tg SO2/y, ∼10 times lower than the annual flux from global persistent degassing. A similar proportion was previously assessed14,15, despite differences in absolute figures. Therefore, our best estimate for strong volcanic emitters that have been measured either by satellite or by ground-based techniques during both persistent and eruptive degassing is 27 ± 2 Tg SO2/y.

CO2 flux from Strong Emitters
Our study builds on previous work by Werner, et al.11 and incorporates additional volcanoes with SO2 flux constraints by OMI and by ground-based techniques. Here we consider the 125 volcanoes which, as described above, had their SO2 flux measured from space and/or from the ground. Among these, 67 have measured C/S ratios (Table S1). As shown by16, in assessing volcanic CO2 fluxes it is critical to use C/S ratios that are representative for the magmatic gas component and not or negligibly affected by sulfur removal during low-temperature hydrothermal processes. In addition to the C/S ratios reported and scrutinized in10,17, we here report C/S ratios for 10 more volcanoes. These ratios were measured with MultiGAS in crater plumes, thereby minimizing low temperature hydrothermal influences and meeting the requirements proposed by10. While C/S ratios have been shown to vary with volcanic activity, long-term average ratios correlate with petrologic indicators and therefore are thought to represent magmatic source compositions. Following the approach of10, we thus averaged the available gas data for each volcano to obtain a mean ± 1 SD (1 standard deviation) CO2/SO2 ratios and effectively integrate the “time-averaged” degassing of each volcano. This procedure minimizes the weight of transient phases of either CO2enriched or, instead, CO2 depleted volcanic gases that are typically observed either prior to or after eruption, owing to the contrasted solubilities of CO2 and S in magmas (e.g.18,19) and the earlier degassing of CO2 during magma ascent and decompression. We note, moreover, that such sequential degassing steps average out in the long-term, as magmas are convectively transported from their deep (CO2-degassing favored) to near-surface (S-degassing favored) storage zones (eg.20,21,22). Mafic to intermediate volcanoes typically erupt more than once in a decade. Over timescales of years/decades, therefore, we stress that time-averaged volcanic gas compositions will most closely approach the CO2/S proportions in the primary undegassed magma and that of the magma source23,24. The error analyses of our results are discussed separately below. For the 67 volcanoes with measured SO2 fluxes and representative magmatic C/S ratios we obtain a total flux of 22.9 Tg CO2/y. An additional 8 volcanoes have measured C/S ratios but no SO2 flux constraints. In order to estimate the CO2 flux from the remaining volcanoes that have measured SO2 fluxes (among a total of 125), we need an indirect approach to assess unmeasured magmatic C/S ratios. Aiuppa, et al.17 have shown that magma’s geochemical signatures can be used to predict magmatic C/S ratios for arc volcanoes that are located in a same arc segment. The 35 predicted ratios directly taken from Aiuppa, et al.17 are shown in Table S1. For 33 of these volcanoes with measured SO2 flux we infer a cumulative CO2 flux of 11.1 Tg CO2/y. To estimate C/S ratios of the remaining 24 volcanoes we again adopt the approach of17 where unmeasured volcanoes are categorized in Groups 1, 2 and 3 based on their tectonic location. Group 1 and 2 volcanoes have respective average C/S ratios of 1.2 ± 0.5 and 2.4 ± 0.7 (range: 2.1 ± 0.7 to 2.7 ± 0.7) that primarily reflect the C input from subducted slab-derived fluids, whereas Group 3 volcanoes receive substantial additions of carbon from the overlying crust and display higher C/S ratios (5 ± 1.5 on average)17. Here we distribute volcanoes undocumented for C/S in Groups 1, 2 and 3 according to their tectonic setting and we assign them the above average ratio for each Group. Using this approach, we are able to assign C/S ratios to 61 volcanoes in Table S1. Among these, 23 have a known SO2 flux and hence provide a total flux of 2.0 Tg CO2/y. Using this approach, we thus obtain CO2 fluxes for a total of 123 volcanoes with either measured or estimated C/S ratios. There are only two arc volcanoes, namely Poas in Costa Rica and Iwo-Jima in Japan, with directly reported CO2 flux (0.038 Tg CO2/y and 0.1 Tg CO2/y, respectively)11. Table S1 also includes 4 volcanoes with known SO2 flux but whose C/S ratio cannot be inferred from the above method since they occur in hot spot or continental rift settings. The hot spot volcano, Kilauea, is an important emitter: its ground-based measured CO2 flux averaged 8,587 ± 7,161 t/day (3.1 ± 2.6 Tg/y) in the period 2005–201711, excluding the 2008–2010 phase of heightened eruptive activity. A lower flux of 3,174 ± 1708 t CO2/day (1.2 ± 0.6 Tg CO2/y) was estimated from solely OMI SO2 fluxes and C/S ratios in 2005–2018. The reported flux error is based on a SD of 0.3 for the C/S ratio. As shown by Werner et al.11, in general there is a quite good agreement between CO2 fluxes indirectly derived from ground-based and satellite measurements at those volcanoes covered by both methodologies, with overall only 20% higher values for the ground-based measurements. In the case of Kilauea, the flux difference merely results from the use of a constant C/S ratio of 0.92 combined with the entire OMI SO2 flux record, whereas ground-based sensing actually captured a period of anomalously high CO2 degassing (high C/S ratio) at the summit in 2005–2007, prior to the 2008 eruption25. In order to be consistent with our approach using OMI and C/S ratios for high emitters, we consider here the OMI-based conservative CO2 flux of 1.2 Tg CO2/y at Kilauea.

In summary, we assess a best estimate of 13.1 Tg CO2/y for the cumulative CO2 flux from volcanoes whose SO2 plume emissions are strong enough to be quantified either from space or from the ground, but whose C/S ratios were not measured. Therefore, the overall persistent (non-eruptive) CO2 flux from the 125 volcanoes discussed above is 36.0 Tg CO2/y or 8.2 × 1011 mol CO2/y.

CO2 flux from explosively erupting volcanoes
In order to estimate the CO2 flux from explosively erupting volcanoes, it is necessary to know the C/S ratio during such eruptions. But, due to obvious challenges, C/S determinations during such events are scarce (Table S1). One example is the Cotopaxi 2015 eruption, in Ecuador, during which a C/S range of 0.6 to 2.1 was measured26. We note that the inferred ratio of 1.8 we used in Table S1 to compute the eruptive CO2 flux from this volcano plots well in this range. Although more determinations of eruptive gas ratios are badly needed, we show below that explosive eruptions contribute modestly to global volcanic CO2 emissions and, so, that even a factor 2 uncertainty in C/S ratio during an explosive event has a relatively minor bearing. For a small number of volcanoes the C/S ratio has been measured just before or after an explosive eruption. Assuming that this ratio is representative for the eruption, we can estimate a CO2 flux for these volcanoes. 26 out of the 89 volcanoes that erupted between 2005 and 2017 have this datum available (Table S1). For these volcanoes we estimate a total eruptive release of 14.5 Tg CO2 during the eruptions from 2005–2017, i.e. a mean annual flux of 1.1 Tg CO2. If we simply extrapolate the average flux per erupting volcano to all (arc and non-arc) of the 89 volcanoes that erupted in 2005–2017, we obtain a total eruptive release of 49.5 Tg CO2 or a flux of 3.8 Tg CO2/y. If we instead use Aiuppa et al.’s approach17 to predict C/S ratios at the 52 undocumented arc volcanoes that erupted in 2005–2017, based on their grouping category, we can estimate an arc eruptive CO2 flux of 0.7 Tg CO2/y (9.0 Tg CO2 in total). The remaining 11 erupting volcanoes are in hot spots or rifts, where we do not know C/S ratios (Table S1). Therefore, our best estimate for eruptive CO2 emissions in the period 2005–2017 is 23.5 Tg CO2 or about 1.8 Tg CO2/y (4.1 × 1010 mol CO2/y). This is nearly identical to the estimate of 1.6 Tg CO2/y for explosive eruptions and 1.9 Tg CO2/y for both explosive and effusive eruptions presented in Werner et al.11. These figures represent only about 5% of the total CO2 flux from persistently degassing volcanoes, therefore reiterating the early discovery that quiescent volcanic degassing contributes the bulk of volcanic emissions globally7,14,15.

SO2 and CO2 fluxes from weak emitters
Out of all approximately 900 volcanoes listed in Syracuse and Abers12, there are 125 strong volcanic emitters documented by either OMI or ground-based SO2 flux measurements (Table S1). There are also 19 weaker emitting volcanoes, undetected by OMI, but whose CO2 flux was determined from either ground-based sensing of SO2 flux and C/S ratio (Table S1) or direct CO2 measurement. These 19 volcanoes, not listed in Table S1, emit 1.50 TgCO2/y. Apart from these 144 volcanoes, there remain 756 volcanoes in Syracuse and Abers’s12 inventory for which we have essentially no data and that require extrapolation in order to constrain the global volcanic volatile fluxes (Fig. 1). All these volcanoes either are not degassing at all or are weak emitters of SO2 and, therefore, we expect their overall contribution to the global CO2 budget to be small.

In addition to the 19 weak emitters mentioned above, we select a number of volcanoes in Table S2 that have low SO2 fluxes (<0.1 Tg/y) but well characterized C/S ratios. 38 of these have both measured CO2 and SO2 fluxes, two volcanoes displaying relatively high SO2 flux (Ebeko, 0.18 Tg/y, and Satsuma Iwojima, 0.21 Tg/y). A plot of CO2 flux versus SO2 flux data for the 38 volcanoes (Fig. 2) reveals two main populations of degassing. The first population, which we define as “hydrothermal”, is characterized by very low SO2 flux (<0.003 Tg SO2/y or <8 t SO2/day) and CO2 flux up to ~0.1 Tg/y (~275 t CO2/day). SO2 fluxes below the limit of 8 t SO2/day are exceedingly difficult to measure, even with ground-based techniques, and point to a very low magmatic gas supply, which justifies that the corresponding volcanoes be categorized as non-magmatic or hydrothermal degassers. The 275 t CO2/day value (the highest observed) reflects the fact that low-temperature hydrothermal gas emissions can have exceedingly high C/S ratios10. The second population, defined as “magmatic”, has an SO2 flux >0.003 Tg /y and is composed of two distinct sub-groups (C-rich and C-poor) in terms of CO2 flux. The low-C group (blue line) has CO2 fluxes <0.05 TgCO2/y irrespective of the SO2 flux. The high-C group has up to about 3 times as much CO2 than SO2. Two fitting lines are shown for the high-C group, one is a linear fit, the other is an exponential fit. The low-C group is fitted by an exponential fitting curve.

Figure 2
figure2
Weak emitter volcanoes SO2 detected by ground-based campaigns, CO2 either directly measured or determined using ground-based SO2 flux measurements and C/S ratios (Table S2).

Full size image
While the above evaluation gives us the general understanding that volcanic CO2 emissions fall into two groups (hydrothermal and magmatic), we can use the following statistical approach to compute the probability that a non-measured volcano has a CO2 flux value below a determined value that is intrinsic to the population of the weak emitter volcanoes. In order to do this, we use the measured CO2 flux of all 45 volcanoes in Table S2 to extrapolate to the remaining volcanoes that have no measurements, in order to obtain the most probable total global volcanic CO2 flux.

For our extrapolation to non-measured  weak emitters, we utilize the GSA method commonly applied to partitioning complex distribution of soil CO2 flux data in different log normal populations27. In this treatment, the first step is to plot the log CO2 flux values in a logarithmic probability plot (Fig. 3) where a log normal population plots along a straight line while the combined distribution resulting from the overlapping of n log normal populations plot along a curve characterised by n-1 inflection points. The 45 measured log CO2 flux values (yellow circles in Fig. 3) plot along a curve (red line in Fig. 3) with an inflection point at a cumulative probability of 35% indicating the overlapping of the two log normal populations A (fraction 0.35, mean = −2, σ = 0.33) and B (fraction 0.65, mean = −0.99, σ = 0.4). In terms of n log data, the low flux population A (hydrothermal) has a mean of 0.013 Tg/yr (with confidence intervals of 5% and 95% of 0.009 and 0.019 Tg/yr, respectively) while the high flux population B (magmatic) has a mean of 0.156 Tg/yr (with confidence intervals of 5% and 95% of 0.11 and 0.216 Tg/yr, respectively). These results show that hydrothermal fluxes are likely 0.013 TgCO2/y, rather than the 0.1 TgCO2/y estimated visually in Fig. 2, while the magmatic CO2 flux is likely 0.16 Tg CO2/y (431 t CO2/day) which cannot be estimated from the data plotted in Fig. 2. We emphasize that with more data for weak emitters, this characterization will improve in certainty.

Figure 3
figure3
CO2 GSA method commonly applied to partitioning complex distribution of soil CO2 flux data in different log normal populations27 applied to weak emitter volcanoes using data from Table S2. Also shown are several volcanoes that span a range of CO2 fluxes. Two populations are identified: population (A) hydrothermal with mean CO2 flux of 0.013 Tg CO2/y and (B) magmatic with mean CO2flux of 0.156 Tg CO2/y. These populations are used to extrapolate to other weak emitter volcanoes for which no data is available.

Full size image
The next step is to determine which of the 756 volcanoes for which there are no data available are either not emitting gas, or belong to the hydrothermal or magmatic CO2 flux populations. In order to assess this, we utilized the Global Volcanism Program (GVP) data base, examined recent photographs of these volcanoes to better characterize activity and relied on our combined experiences. The approach that we take is to generally evaluate visually whether an unmeasured volcano is likely to exhibit ‘magmatic’ or ‘hydrothermal’ characteristics. A magmatic gas signature would be recognized by a visible fumarolic plume and/or recent (2005–2017) eruptive activity. A hydrothermal gas signature is assigned for volcanoes that have warm, potentially steaming ground, degassing through mud-pools or water, no coherent plume and no large fumaroles. A volcano that is not active, i.e. not degassing at all, lacks all of the above characteristics.

While arguably subjective, this method provides an estimation of the number of degassing volcanoes world-wide that do not have a detectable SO2 emission and allows for evaluating the type of degassing. We classified 404 volcanoes as not degassing, 278 volcanoes that are degassing hydrothermal gas and 74 volcanoes that are degassing magmatic gas (756 total volcanoes), thus giving a total of 371 degassing volcanoes not detected by OMI or in the NOVAC network (Fig. 1).

Ascribing the mean estimated hydrothermal and magmatic flux values to these sets of volcanoes results in 3.7 Tg CO2/y degassing from hydrothermal volcanoes and 11.5 Tg CO2/y from magmatic volcanoes for a total of 15.2 Tg CO2/y for these unmeasured volcanoes globally. Including the mean of 0.07 Tg CO2/y of the 19 measured  weak emitters (Table S2) results in a total of 15.2 TgCO2/y or 3.5 × 1011 mol CO2/y for all weak emitters (Table 1, Fig. 1).

Table 1 CO2 fluxes from weak emitters (SO2 not detected by OMI) globally.
Full size table
Error assessment
An important consideration when evaluating the fluxes of volcanoes globally is the assessment of the error. Carn et al.8 provide estimates of the uncertainty in annual mean SO2 fluxes measured by OMI (~55%), which includes errors associated with retrieved SO2 columns and with variable plume altitude, wind speed, and SO2 lifetime. The uncertainty for the ground-based SO2 fluxes measured by the NOVAC network and selected for this compilation is below 30%. Table S1 provides the fractional uncertainty of the SO2 flux for each volcano. This uncertainty is estimated at 55% and 30% for space- and ground-based measurements, respectively8,9. This reported uncertainty of ∼30% for ground-based SO2 flux measurements with scanning-DOAS follows from the analyses presented in9,13,28. The annual means in SO2 fluxes and their standard errors reported here were calculated from the daily means of SO2 flux measurements, which in turn were calculated from the individual measurements of flux, when at least five measurements of ‘good quality’ were available in a given day. An individual SO2 flux measurement was considered ‘good quality’ when several criteria were met, namely: low spectral fit error in the derivation of SO2 column densities, distance to the plume less than 5 km, complete coverage of the scanned plume, use of values calculated by triangulation for plume height, and use of the (then) best available information for plume speed (ECMWF ERA-interim). With these criteria, we consider that our measurements were taken under ‘good conditions’, as defined in9. This means relative uncertainties of 10% for spectroscopy, 10% for measurement geometry, 20% for wind speed, and 20% for atmospheric scattering, all added as independent variables in quadrature. The value of 20% for scattering (or radiative transfer effects), is slightly higher than ‘good’, to account for possible effects not accounted for in this analysis. Table S1 provides the fractional uncertainty of the SO2 flux for each volcano. The error of CO2 flux is strongly dependant on the methods that are used. In our compilation total error estimates for volcanoes with measurements are composed of the errors in the SO2 flux measured by OMI or by ground-based techniques and the variability of this flux over the 13-year time period, as well as the errors in the C/S ratios used and their variability over the 13-year time period. SO2 flux variability, C/S variability and CO2 flux variabilities over the 13-year time period are expressed as a standard deviation in Tables S1 and S2 (one sigma). The errors of our estimates become significantly larger for non-measured volcanoes where extrapolated values are used for C/S ratios based on tectonic setting or when we need to visually categorize volcanoes as degassing or not degassing, and hydrothermal vs. magmatic (Table 2, Fig. 1). For the predicted C/S ratios based on the volcano group and petrologic method, we ascribe a SD of 1.5 for group 3 and 0.8 for Groups 1 and 2, consistent with the SD ascribed in17. The summary of all volcanic CO2 fluxes is shown in Table 2 and we report the cumulative SD obtained from the SD of the flux SO2 flux measurements and the C/S ratios. In order to assess the error of the measured and predicted CO2 flux from strong emitters, we apply the Monte Carlo method to the summary of the strong emitter volcanoes CO2 data set. In the simulation, the CO2 flux for each volcano is set to vary randomly within its mean ± SD value and the resulting CO2 fluxes are summed together. This procedure is repeated 100 times, resulting in 100 randomly-generated sums. The total values reported in Table 2 are the ranges (mean ± 1 SD) of 70% of the random generated sums. Using the Monte Carlo approach, the total CO2 flux from passively degassing volcanoes then becomes 51.3 ± 5.7 Tg CO2/y.

Table 2 Results of CO2 flux estimates from subaerial volcanoes in the period from 2005 to 2017.
Full size table
The assessment of errors of the eruptive CO2 flux requires additional information that is not currently available. For the majority of eruptive SO2 measurements, no errors are provided29 and the C/S ratios used for computing the CO2 emissions are not measured during the eruptions but only prior to the eruptions. Given these uncertainties, we define the error on the eruptive CO2 flux as ±50%, emphasizing that it is poorly constrained with present data.

Preliminary considerations for diffuse CO2 emissions
A preliminary estimate of the volcanic-hydrothermal CO2 emitted by diffuse emission from soil and lakes is attempted using the published data that are reported in the Magmatic Degassing (MaGa) database at www.magadb.net. The relatively low number of observations with respect to the probable large global number of diffuse degassing structures, hampers the approach of simply summing the catalogued emissions. For this reason, our approach consists of (i) defining the Typical Diffuse CO2 Emission (TDCE) from diffuse degassing and (ii) estimating a reasonable number of the volcanoes hosting diffuse degassing structures. We note that many papers treating CO2 degassing from volcanoes also include a non-quantified (but possibly  significant) fraction of CO2 from background-biogenic sources present. For this reason, we limit the computation of a typical diffuse degassing environment to those articles where the deep-volcanic contribution is clearly differentiated from the biogenic source. Since the published total CO2 fluxes catalogued in MaGa include also the contribution from biogenic sources, TDCE is estimated starting from the 73 cases (Table S3) where the ‘volcanic’ CO2 output is explicitly separated from the biogenic one. The resulting CO2 fluxes, expressed in TgCO2/y, show a lognormal distribution with a mean of 1.99 and standard deviation of 0.78. Applying a Monte Carlo approach we estimate that the mean of the data (i.e. our best estimation of TDCE) is 0.18 TgCO2/y (0.09–0.33 TgCO2/y, 95% confidence interval). Assuming that all the 487 degassing volcanoes host a diffuse degassing structure the total emission from diffuse degassing processes would result in 93 Tg/y (47 Tg/y-174 Tg/y, 95% confidence interval), or 21.22 × 1011 mol/y.

Results and Discussion
Table 2 summarizes the results of the CO2 flux calculations. Including both strong  and weak emitters, the total global flux of CO2 from passively degassing volcanoes is 51.3 Tg CO2/y or 11.7 × 1011 mol CO2/y. Our value of 15.3 Tg CO2/y from weakly emitting volcanoes represents about 30% of the total CO2 flux from passively degassing (51.3 Tg CO2/y) volcanoes. Notably, our preliminary estimate of diffuse degassing (93 Tg CO2/y) is almost twice the total volcanic emission estimate. We stress, however, that this preliminary result could change in the future as the databases of diffuse degassing will include a larger number of data.

Distribution of CO2 fluxes from global emitters and global fluxes of other volatiles
Figure 4 shows the rank-order distribution of CO2 emitters globally. The compilation of12 has approximately 900 volcanoes in total of which about 400 are not degassing, leaving about 500 that have some type of degassing activity. As previously recognized for SO28,30 and CO211,17,31, a few large emitters contribute the vast majority of emissions to the global volcanic gas flux. Based on our compilation, the top ten volcanoes contribute approximately 18.5 Tg CO2/y or 50% of the 40 Tg CO2/y emitted by the top 100 volcanoes. This finding is in agreement with the recent estimate of 38.7 ± 2.9 Tg CO2/y for the 91 most actively degassing volcanoes presented by17. This leaves about 400 volcanoes that have some type of degassing and of these we have emission estimates for 68 volcanoes that emit 1.8 Tg CO2/y. The remaining ~370 volcanoes therefore emit about 13 Tg CO2/y, considering our total estimate of 51.3 Tg CO2 for all passively degassing volcanoes. The results also show that, taken together the 80 small emitters (releasing <100 kt CO2/y) for which we have data emit a combined 3.1 Tg CO2/y or almost twice the amount of the erupting volcanoes (1.8 Tg CO2/y). Therefore, for the most accurate estimates of global emissions, the weak emitters remain at least as significant as the erupting volcanoes. Importantly, weak emitters may become more active and become strong emitters and vice versa, necessitating continued efforts for quantifying volcanic gas emissions from satellite- and ground-based observations.

Figure 4
figure4
Cumulative number of degassing volcanoes. Values indicate the measured or estimated CO2 fluxes of the total 500 degassing volcanoes and the total 900 volcanoes. Data show that the top 100 volcanoes emit about 40 Tg CO2/y. The remaining 68 volcanoes for which we have estimates emit only 1.8 Tg CO2/y.

Full size image
The new updated volcanic CO2 flux compilation also requires an updated estimation of the flux of other volatiles using previously published other compositional ratios (i.e. H2O/CO2, HCl/CO2) of high temperature gases32. Future work should consider updating these high temperature gas data, especially for H2O but this is beyond the scope of this work. The data compiled on an arc-by-arc basis is shown in Table 3. Note that in Table 3 we include the estimate of the not measured volcanoes. Following the approach described above, we sum up the number of volcanoes for each arc that are inferred to have hydrothermal degassing and assign 3.7 Tg CO2/y to these volcanoes (Table 1). Likewise, we sum the volcanoes that are inferred to have magmatic degassing and assign 11.5 Tg CO2/y. This amount is then added to the amounts measured for the weak and strong emitter volcanoes for each arc. The data compiled on an arc-by-arc basis is shown in Table 3. For some arcs, we do not have any available gas ratios and cannot calculate H2O and HCl fluxes.

Table 3 GLobal arc, continental rift and plume passive degassing volatile fluxes based on revised CO2 fluxes.
Full size table
Hot spot and continental rift passive degassing fluxes are also shown in Table 3. We recognize that there is a potentially large quantity of diffuse CO2 degassing from the East African Rift33,34 and from caldera-hosted hydrothermal systems35, however, the total continental rift volcanic flux is dominated by Nyiragongo and Nyamuragira in the Congo for which gas ratios are also available measured by FTIR in the plume36. Likewise, there is significant hot spot CO2 flux from low temperature hydrothermal systems37, however, the hot spot volcanic flux is dominated by Kilauea. In the future a more rigorous treatment of hot spot and rift CO2 degassing, with particular attention to low temperature hydrothermal systems is needed. Overall, our estimates of volcanic degassing from hot spots and rifts are orders of magnitude smaller than volcanic degassing from arcs, entirely consistent with previous assessments31,38,39.

Comparison with other recent volcanic gas flux compilations
Our value of 51.3 ± 5.7 Tg CO2/y is at the lower end of the recent evaluation of Werner et al.11 who estimated 88 ± 21 Tg CO2/y for persistently passive degassing volcanoes. Werner et al.11 calculated and compiled CO2 fluxes for a set of 102 volcanoes with direct measurements and 55 OMI-detected volcanoes that emit a total CO2 flux of 44 and 27 Tg CO2/y, respectively. The difference between our estimate and the Werner et al.11 estimate is the result of the new treatment of the volcanoes not emitting large quantities of SO2. Our new approach considers the type of degassing at each type of volcano and its tectonic setting and based on these parameters, the likely magmatic C/S ratio.

Compared to other recent compilations, our total arc CO2 flux of 11 × 1011 mol/y is half of Kagoshima et al.38 who report 22 ± 5 × 1011 mol/y based on arc 3He fluxes and about 60% of that reported by Fischer32 who reports 19 × 1011 mol/y based on previously reported arc sulfur fluxes and the same high temperature gas ratios. It is also significantly lower than the global arc CO2 flux of Shinohara40 who report 120 × 1011 mol/y based on detailed studies of the Japan arc and extrapolation to global arcs. However, that study also includes diffuse soil degassing, degassing from springs and emissions during eruptions. If we combine our total flux estimate of 11 × 1011 mol/y with our diffuse flux estimate of 21 × 1011 mol/y, we obtain 32 × 1011 mol/y, still a factor of almost 4 lower than the estimate of Shinohara40.

Our maximum estimate of 32 × 1011 mol/y for combined diffuse and volcanic CO2 degassing includes emission from volcanoes in all tectonic settings. Our low arc fluxes have significant implications for evaluating the global deep carbon cycle. The recent compilation of Kelemen and Manning41 suggest significant recycling or storage of C into the deep mantle or below the arc crust, respectively. Our low volcanic CO2 emission rates support this idea. Even with the estimated diffuse degassing flux, the total arc CO2 flux is on the lower end of most previous estimates suggesting that a significant portion of the incoming C delivered by the subducting plates either gets recycled into the deep mantle41,42,43, is added to the arc crust41 and may eventually end up below cratons44 or is consumed by microbes and/or trapped in precipitated calcite in the forearc before reaching the zones of magma generation45. Compared to the most recent CO2 flux estimates from mid ocean ridges (MOR) of 1.32 × 1012 mol C/y46,our total flux (volcanic craters and diffuse) of 3.2 × 1012 mol/y is about a factor of 2.5 higher ,  establishing that subaerial volcanoes are the most significant emitters of volcanic CO2 to the Earth's surface.

Foto/Bisnis Indonesia via Reuters

 PDF version
Early in 2018, the volcano Anak Krakatau in Indonesia started falling apart. It was a subtle transformation — one that nobody noticed at the time. The southern and southwestern flanks of the volcano were slipping towards the ocean at a rate of about 4 millimetres per month, a shift so small that researchers only saw it after the fact as they combed through satellite radar data. By June, though, the mountain began showing obvious signs of unrest. It spewed fiery ash and rocks into the sky in a series of small eruptions. And it was heating up. Another satellite instrument recorded thermal emissions from Anak Krakatau that reached 146 megawatts — more than 100 times the normal value. With the increased activity, the slippage jumped to 10 millimetres per month.

Then, on 22 December, the southern flank crashed into the sea, triggering a tsunami that killed at least 430 people along the nearby coasts of Java and Sumatra. Although nobody foresaw that disaster, a 2019 study found that satellite and ground-based instruments had picked up a suite of precursory signals that could help forecast similar events in the future at Anak Krakatau and other peaks.

The unexpected collapse at Anak Krakatau shows some of the challenges facing researchers as they try to monitor thousands of potentially dangerous volcanoes around the world — each one unique. But it also highlights several advances in the field that promise to give scientists a much better chance of forecasting disasters.


Volcanologists are making substantial headway, thanks to a torrent of data from satellites that can detect subtle movements of mountains, ground-based sensors that track molten rock moving deep underground, and gas-sniffing devices that drones can carry over seething mountains. And the theoretical understanding of volcanoes has grown markedly as researchers have learnt to combine all these data into models of what is happening within volcanic systems. Researchers are now experimenting with machine learning to sift through the flood of data to identify subtle patterns, such as the early movement of Anak Krakatau months before it showed signs of waking.

The field has made huge strides since the greatest volcanic crisis in US history exactly 40 years ago — the eruption of Mount St Helens on 18 May 1980 in Washington state. That event — which started with the largest landslide in recorded history — killed 57 people and blanketed much of Washington and nearby states with ash, shutting down the region for days. But it was also a turning point for volcanic science, sparking a huge influx of money and people into the field and setting the stage for rapid improvements in understanding.


Earth’s lost history of planet-altering eruptions revealed
Scientists had flocked to the mountain in the months before the blast and had carefully tracked its behaviour, including frequent earthquakes, gases fuming from its crater and an ominous bulge that swelled from its northern flank. “It was the first really significant eruption that was captured by modern-day scientific instrumentation,” says Seth Moran, scientist-in-charge at the US Geological Survey (USGS) Cascades Volcano Observatory in Vancouver, Washington. “And so, in a lot of ways, it’s become a benchmark for the ways that people go about looking at volcanoes around the world.”

The proliferation of ground- and space-based monitoring data since then, coupled with increases in computing power, has revolutionized scientists’ understanding of volcanic systems. Ultimately, researchers are hoping that new tools and techniques will nudge them closer to being able to assign probabilities to the chances of a volcano erupting in a given time frame, much as meteorologists dole out the chances of rain or snow on any specific day.

“I think that when people look back on this period, they will imagine this is the golden era of physical volcanology,” says volcanologist Christopher Kilburn at University College London.

Historic blast
The first hints of trouble at Mount St Helens came on 16 March 1980, with a series of small earthquakes. Then, a week later, steam explosions burst through the ice on top of the volcano, carving out a crater that grew to 400 metres across within days. Teams of researchers arrived from the USGS and other institutions to keep vigil over the mountain. Planes flew over the smoking crater to measure the gases escaping from the volcano, and seismometers registered the tremors from magma — molten rock — moving beneath the surface. Volcanologists climbed the mountain’s slopes to measure the bulging northern flank using tape measures and laser-surveying equipment.

Magma was clearly rising high in the volcano and pushing against the slope, and researchers warned that a major eruption could happen soon. But what happened next caught scientists by surprise.

At 8:32 a.m. on 18 May, a massive landslide crashed down the mountainside, taking the summit and snow and ice with it. The release in pressure uncorked the volcano, triggering a powerful explosion. A blast of rocks, ash, gas and steam was propelled upwards and outwards at supersonic speeds, and travelled as far as 25 kilometres northwards.

Sequence of four photos of Mount Saint Helens showing a large landslide after an earthquake in 1980.
On 18 May 1980, a giant landslide — the largest in recorded history — carried away the north flank of Mount St Helens, triggering an eruption.Credit: USGS

“We learnt from the May 18th eruption how unstable steep-sided volcanoes are, and how they can fail and generate a big surge or lateral blast,” says Don Swanson, a research geologist at the USGS Hawaiian Volcano Observatory, who was involved in monitoring the 1980 eruption. “What seems so obvious now, wasn’t obvious before that time.”

After the eruption, scientists analysed the landscape and found it littered with hummocks — large hills and mounds that had been transported downslope in intact blocks. These features matched those found near many volcanoes around the world. And from the historical record, volcanologists recognized that around 1,000 similar landslides had taken place on more than 550 volcanoes. “Tall volcanoes collapse, they’re not just growing, they’re collapsing,” says volcanologist Thomas Walter at the German Research Centre for Geosciences in Potsdam.

The eruption of Mount St Helens taught other lessons, such as the deadly impact of superheated volcanic ash and gas racing down the mountain at hurricane speeds, and the power of mudslides that destroyed everything in their path. The eruption also spurred a huge growth in volcanology. In the decade after the blast, the USGS established volcano observatories in the Pacific Northwest, Hawaii and Alaska.

Funding for the USGS’s volcanic hazards programme today is nearly ten times what it was before the Mount St Helens blast. And after a volcanic mudslide in Colombia killed 23,000 people in 1985, the USGS established the Volcano Disaster Assistance Program to help other countries prepare for volcanic crises — a project that soon proved its worth when USGS researchers worked with scientists in the Philippines in 1991 to assess the risk from Mount Pinatubo. Tens of thousands of people were evacuated from the region before the volcano’s cataclysmic eruption.

A plume of smoke rises up from Mount St Helens
The eruption of Mount St Helens on 18 May 1980 ejected a massive plume of ash that reached heights of at least 30 kilometres, well into the stratosphere.Credit: Corbis via Getty

Researchers today rely on many of the lessons learnt at St Helens, Pinatubo and dozens of other volcanoes. Typically, seismic shaking is the first sign that a volcano is stirring. Eruptions occur when magma pushes to the surface, but even as magma begins to rise from Earth’s mantle, it can trigger quakes. Today, seismic networks are monitoring dozens of some of the most dangerous volcanoes around the world.

That same magma movement can cause volcanoes to inflate, as Mount St Helens did before its blast. Researchers can now record movements safely and continuously, using GPS receivers and, more recently, satellite-borne radar — which detected the movement at Anak Krakatau.

Even before warning signs can be seen or felt, rising levels of carbon dioxide from a volcano’s crater or vents can hint at trouble ahead. Magma contains dissolved gases and as this molten material rises and the pressure decreases, gases separate off and travel upwards. Carbon dioxide, one of the least soluble of the volcanic gases, escapes first, while the magma is still deep in the volcano. “In principle, you should get a gas signal long before the magma reaches the surface in an eruption,” says volcanic-gas geochemist Alessandro Aiuppa at the University of Palermo in Sicily, Italy.

Historically, scientists had to collect gas samples from near the crater or vents — a dangerous task that yielded only episodic bites of information. Then, in 2005, Italian researchers designed an instrument — a multicomponent gas analyser system (Multi-GAS) — that is not much bigger than a shoebox. Volcanologists install these sensors near vents, and also mount them on drones that fly over active craters to measure the levels of five key gases emitted by volcanoes. “This has been a real revolution for volcanic-gas science because it means you can have a measurement of volcanic-gas composition every second, in real time, on your computer,” Aiuppa says.

A volcano on the Eyjafjallajökull glacier erupts in Iceland
A satellite image of the Icelandic volcano Eyjafjallajökull erupting on 16 April 2010. The blast, which started two days earlier, disrupted air traffic across parts of Europe for days.Credit: DigitalGlobe via Getty

Blast forecast
The Multi-GAS instruments had their trial by fire on Stromboli, a volcano off the north coast of Sicily. Italian scientists installed these sensors, along with cameras and spectrometers, on the volcano in 2005 and have collected gas data ever since. In February 2007, lava began to ooze out of the volcano in an effusive eruption. The researchers saw that carbon dioxide levels rose tenfold over the two weeks before the volcano erupted explosively on 15 March1.

The findings allowed volcanologists to build a conceptual model of this complex volcano, in which explosions emanate from a deep magma chamber 7–10 kilometres below the summit. The researchers determined that the chances of an explosive eruption increase when carbon dioxide emissions top 2,000 tonnes per day.

In August 2019, Stromboli oozed lava again, and for the next two weeks the Italians tracked a slow, progressive increase in carbon dioxide. “So, we knew that something was going to happen,” Aiuppa says. The team increased its vigilance and also closely monitored ground-level changes using tiltmeters that measure subtle changes in ground angle. Eventually, what they saw made them certain that an explosion was coming soon, and they alerted the local authorities minutes before a blast on 28 August.


How AI and satellites could help predict volcanic eruptions
At Mount Etna on the Sicilian mainland, Italian researchers are tracking low-frequency sound waves — infrasound waves — that some volcanoes emit before they erupt. Scientists installed the system on Etna in 2008 and analysed its performance for 59 eruptions in the following 8 years. It successfully predicted 57 of the events, and sent messages to the researchers about an hour before each eruption2. Given this success, in 2015 the team programmed the system to send automatic e-mail and text-message alerts to the civil-protection department in Rome and to the city of Catania close to the volcano.

The researchers’ original motivation for developing the system was to find a way to detect eruptions at unmonitored volcanoes, because even remote blasts can have far-reaching impacts. The eruption of Eyjafjallajökull in Iceland in 2010 created an ash plume that disrupted air traffic across Europe for weeks. “Volcanic risk has no borders,” says Maurizio Ripepe, a geophysicist at the University of Florence, Italy, who helped to create the automated early-warning system on Etna.

Currently, fewer than half of the world’s active volcanoes on land have any sort of ground instrumentation, and in many cases this consists of just a few seismometers. But in the past decade, researchers have gained new ways to monitor all volcanoes using instruments mounted on satellites.

Data deluge
On 10 April 2020, Indonesia’s Anak Krakatau spewed a column of ash 500 metres into the sky and the Center for Volcanology and Geological Hazard Mitigation in Indonesia issued a level-2 alert, which signifies that the volcano has the potential to erupt but poses limited hazards.

After the deadly tsunami in 2018, German volcanologists had found a striking pattern at Anak Krakatau that was apparent in data recorded by the moderate-resolution imaging spectroradiometer (MODIS) on a NASA satellite. Infrared channels revealed that thermal emissions jumped in June 20183. “The whole volcano was hot, the most intense activity ever recorded,” says Walter. “So, this was clearly anomalous behaviour.”

The researchers also used satellite radar observations, which can detect small changes in vertical and horizontal motion, to find that the volcano’s flank was already slipping at a rate of 10 millimetres per month before it collapsed (see ‘Island on the move’).

Island on the move: Satellite radar data showing how the ground surface of Anak Krakatau shifted before an eruption.

The research demonstrated how, even when ground instrumentation is limited, scientists can learn about the lead-up to an eruption or volcanic landslide from satellites. “As volcanologists, we always used to say that we were data poor,” says Michael Poland, scientist-in-charge at the USGS Yellowstone Volcano Observatory in Vancouver, Washington. “But now the satellite data really expand our ability to see what volcanoes are doing.”

Volcanology got a huge boost in 2014 and 2016 with the launch of the European Space Agency’s Sentinel 1A and 1B radar satellites. Using the technique of interferometric synthetic-aperture radar, they can track movements of volcanoes at unprecedented resolution levels and at frequent time intervals (see ‘Inflation watch’). “These satellites can detect subcentimetre deformation of ground surfaces, meaning that we can see when the volcano is swelling,” says volcanologist Charles Mandeville, programme coordinator of the USGS Volcano Hazards Program. “There is a whole fire hose of such data being collected now.”

Inflation watch: Radar interferometry data showing that parts of the Hawaiian volcano Kilauea are currently rising.

Researchers have combined radar data with satellite observations that record temperature and sulfur dioxide emissions to capture a multidimensional picture of what happens at volcanoes before and during eruptions. A study of the 47 most active volcanoes in South America, which used 17 years of satellite data, showed that changes in at least one of these variables, and sometimes in all three, precede an eruption, sometimes years in advance4.

To exploit these data, many of which are freely available, Walter and colleagues have created a volcano-monitoring platform called MOUNTS (monitoring unrest from space). The platform uses data from the current suite of Sentinel satellites and ground-based earthquake information, and currently monitors 17 volcanoes, including Anak Krakatau.

As they started on the project, however, the researchers faced a new and unusual problem — too much data. The satellites provide torrents of readings, more than researchers can analyse using conventional methods. “There are so many volcanoes and so much data that we needed smarter ways of dealing with the data set,” Walter says.

In response to this challenge, researchers have turned to machine-learning techniques, a form of artificial intelligence in which computer algorithms such as neural networks can be trained to pick out patterns in data. Juliet Biggs, a volcanologist at the University of Bristol, UK, and her colleagues have created a neural network that has churned through some 30,000 Sentinel-1 images of more than 900 volcanoes and flagged about 100 images as needing more attention. Of those images, 39 showed real ground distortions5, meaning that the AI system had reduced the workload for the volcanologists by a factor of nearly 10. Now, they are testing their system on some half a million images from more than 1,000 volcanoes.

“You just can’t look at every image,” Poland says. “I see machine learning as having a real impact in filtering through these massive volumes of data.”

For the MOUNTS platform, scientists have also developed a neural network to search for large shape changes. Other groups are trying to develop algorithms that can sift through temperature or gas-emission data from satellites.


Why deadly New Zealand volcano eruption was hard to predict
When Anak Krakatau sprang back into action on 10 April this year, Walter was quick to monitor the situation remotely by analysing the satellite data. Because visibility was low, he had to rely on the radar data, which can penetrate thick clouds. The information will help scientists understand the behaviour of Anak Krakatau and in the future it might be used to help create a tsunami early-warning system for landslides from the Indonesian volcano, Walter says.

Biggs says that the combination of satellite data and AI is a useful tool for drawing attention to possible risks and prioritizing the installation of ground-based instruments. Such remote-monitoring techniques provide valuable information and are safer for scientists, but she thinks they are never going to completely replace having instruments close to the volcano itself.

In the United States, researchers will soon gain a large new source of ground-based data. In March 2019, US legislators passed a bill to fund the National Volcano Early Warning System (NVEWS). When implemented, NVEWS will lead to the installation of digital broadband seismometers on 104 of the country’s volcanoes and new digital-telemetry networks with sufficient bandwidth to carry data from a number of different ground sensors.

Future shocks
In the past 40 years, scientists have successfully forecast the timing of many eruptions, from smaller blasts at Mount St Helens in the early 1980s to the ash-rich lava fountains at Mount Etna. “A lot of progress has been made on the timing aspect,” Poland says. “Perhaps in a very large part because of the amount of instrumentation, the advent of space-based monitoring and the increase in observations that we have.”

Nevertheless, volcanic eruptions still take people fatally by surprise. A small explosive eruption at Mount Ontake in Japan in 2014 killed 63 people, and a violent eruption of the Fuego volcano in Guatemala in June 2018 killed hundreds. A minor eruption at White Island in New Zealand in 2019 claimed 21 lives.

One challenge facing volcanologists is that they are trying to infer what’s happening deep underground by looking at data such as gas emissions and shape changes on the surface. And each volcano has its own personality — its own unique set of materials and structure.

The individualistic nature of volcanoes highlights the limitations of using patterns from past eruptions to forecast future ones. When volcanologists see the first warning signs, they often think they’ve seen this before and know what happens, Poland says. “But the volcanoes haven’t watched that movie,” he says. “They’ve evolved in ways that are incredibly complex, and our understanding of the complexities are very cursory at this point.”

With more data and better understanding of volcanic systems, researchers hope to develop dynamic models that can capture the physics and chemistry of what happens below ground. In this way, the development of volcanology could parallel that of meteorology, which uses dynamic models of the atmosphere to forecast weather many days in advance.

But volcanic systems are so complex and so hidden that volcanic forecasts will never be as good as meteorological ones, says Poland. “It is a fun exercise to think that one day you will open the newspaper and see the volcano forecast next to the weather forecast,” he says. “But we are still a long way from that.”

Silicic magmatic systems are the most dangerous volcanoes on Earth, capable of large and catastrophic eruptions, yet their low eruptive frequency makes it challenging to interpret their short-term unrest. Here we present a decade-plus analysis that integrates, for the first time, time series of satellite interferometric synthetic aperture radar (InSAR) surface deformation and satellite thermal infrared edifice-scale surface warming at a large silicic system: Domuyo volcano, in Argentina. We find that deformation and warming are highly correlated, and depending on the sign and lag between the time series, either shallow sealing or magma influx could drive Domuyo’s ongoing inflation (~ 0.15 m/year; from an InSAR-derived tabular source, ~ 11 × 8 × 1 km; ~ 6.5 km depth; ~ 0.037 km3/year volume-change rate) and warming (0.3–0.4 °C/year). This study shows the potential that combined satellite surface deformation and edifice-scale surface warming time series have on assessing the physical mechanisms of silicic volcanic systems and for constraining deterministic models.

Introduction
Volcanic unrest has traditionally (pre-twenty-first century) been discovered either through direct observations by local populations or through the analysis of in-situ data by observatory personnel. Thus, studies are usually focused on frequently active volcanoes or those in better instrumented locations (e.g., Kilauea or Etna). The detection of volcanic unrest has been greatly expanded thanks to the advent of satellite-based remote-sensing methods, casting light on the variability of volcanic unrest signals from both geodesy1,2 and thermal infrared spectroscopy3,4,5,6,7.

Over the past 20 years, satellite synthetic aperture radar interferometry (InSAR) has discovered previously unrecognized volcanoes undergoing unrest1,8,9. In many of these volcanoes, deformation has been detected without other unrest signals, either due to deformation preceding other signs of activity or because there was no significant observational infrastructure in place to identify other signals. Deformation unrest can be variable, with continuous inflation and deflation at Campi Flegrei, Italy10, and Yellowstone11 calderas, or with sudden onset of inflation at long-dormant systems such as Lazufre8, South Sister9, and Laguna del Maule12. Lacking other observations (e.g., thermal, gas, seismicity), the simplest interpretation of deformation unrest is that it represents magma migration at depth. InSAR spatial deformation patterns, as well as the time dependence of the deformation, allows the constraint of source model parameters that form the basis for time variable physical model interpretation13,14,15.

Satellite-based thermal infrared (TIR) remote sensing of volcanoes has a history of over half a century5,16. The detection of thermal unrest is achieved through two different approaches. The first is by detecting and tracking hotspots (e.g., using ASTER6, MODIS-based automatic platforms such as MODVOLC3 or MIROVA4; or SEVIRI-based automatic platforms such as HOTVOLC17), typically associated with fumaroles or the presence of a magma body at the surface3,18. This approach has permitted reporting of possible short-term (< 1 year) pre-eruptive thermal anomalies at a number of volcanoes, including ones in Kamchatka, Russia19,20,21; Asama, Japan22; Etna, Italy23; Hudson, Chile24; and Eyjafjallajökull, Iceland25. The second, recently developed, approach7 consists of computing the long-term (> 1 year), large-scale (10 s-to-100 s of km2), variations of the volcano’s median ground brightness temperature using the MODIS instruments aboard NASA’s Terra and Aqua satellites, which are thought to reflect the enhancement of subsurface hydrothermal activity. This technique has been shown to be efficient at detecting long-term pre-eruptive surface warming for different types of eruptions (including magmatic, phreatic, and hydrothermal), even for volcanoes where no other unrest signals have been reported.

In this work, we present decade-plus observations of surface deformation and large-scale surface warming at a large silicic system: Domuyo volcano. Domuyo is an intriguing volcanic complex located in northern Patagonia, Argentina (Fig. 1). It is the largest such complex in the Las Loicas Trough, which also includes Laguna del Maule caldera to the NW and Tromen volcano to the SE26. Geologically, Domuyo is a young volcano composed of a complex of Tertiary rhyolitic to dacitic intrusions, overlain by Quaternary pyroclastic deposits and lava flows that intrude and overlie back arc shallow Mesozoic marine deposits26. Domuyo is recognized mostly for its geothermal potential, which is centered beneath its southwest flanks, extending approximately 15 km from the summit27. A hydrochemical study of the geothermal field25 found up to 1.1 GW thermal energy release, making it second only to Yellowstone in advective geothermal heat flux. They concluded that such a large heat flux is hard to explain in terms of the cooling of magmatic intrusions dated at 0.72 Ma or the most recent magmatic eruptive activity at 0.11 Ma from Cerro Domo26, thus suggesting recent reactivation of the system. Reactivation of Domuyo is also supported by several gas-driven explosions occurring in the active hydrothermal system over the past two decades27,28. A chemical and isotopic analysis29 found evidence for both shallow (400–600 m) and deeper (2–3 km) hydrothermal reservoirs, as well as evidence for an actively degassing magma source at unknown depth. They considered the high (~ 86%) mantle He contribution surprising for a system with no eruptive activity in 100 ka. A new analysis of gravity, magnetic, InSAR surface deformation, and geomorphology data at Domuyo found that recent (2015–2018) inflation is consistent with volatile rich magma intruded at 7 km depth30.

Figure 1
figure1
Domuyo volcanic complex. (a) Domuyo volcano lies in the southern Andes in Argentina, east of the main volcanic arc. Seismicity (white circles) greater than ML 2 at Domuyo is comparable to other active volcanoes (Copahue, Nevados del Chillán, Planchon Peteroa, Laguna del Maule). Green dashed box around Domuyo volcano is the area covered in (b) and the interferograms shown in Fig. 2. (b) Seismicity (white circles) scaled by magnitude, geothermal springs, and volcanic centers plotted over a simplified geological map based on Galetto et al.26. Purple to darker blue represent older marine sediments, whereas light blue through earth colors are Miocene-Quaternary volcanic rocks (legend, lower left).

Full size image
In the following, we show how the dynamic processes governing the current unrest of Domuyo, a silicic system without a magmatic eruption in ~ 0.1 Ma, can be deciphered combining time series of surface deformation and edifice-scale surface warming. Specifically, we compile InSAR surface deformation from 2008–2019 (derived from ALOS, RADARSAT-2, ALOS-2, and Sentinel-1 satellites) and surface warming from 2002–2019 (derived from the moderate resolution imaging spectroradiometers -MODIS- aboard NASA’s Aqua and Terra satellites). InSAR time series are used to constrain a continuum mechanical model for an ellipsoidal volume source, whose consistency is tested by comparing with the location, timing and moment release of recent seismicity. Surface warming time series is used to compare the current warming levels with those preceding the last two gas-driven eruptions in the active hydrothermal field (2007 and 2012), explore its correlation with deformation, and then infer feasible conceptual deformation-warming models. Finally, we discuss the status of Domuyo volcano in the context of these conceptual models, as well as the implications they have for processes of long-term silicic volcano reservoir evolution and for possible future eruptions.

Results
We present the results from analysis of InSAR data and geodetic source modeling, TIR surface warming time series, and cross-correlation of the two time-series. The methodology and analysis details behind these results are given in the Methods section and Supplementary table and figures.

Surface deformation and source modelling
Radar interferograms from different radar satellite missions (ALOS, RSAT2, Sentinel-1, ALOS-2; see Methods for details) and different time intervals show a sequence of deflation and null deformation followed by the current on-going inflation (Fig. 2). Individual interferograms (Supplementary Figs. 1–6) from each satellite track are used to compute InSAR time series (Supplementary Fig. 7). In particular, RSAT2 data reveal that there was no resolvable deformation between 2013 and early 2014, and from mid-2014 to September 2014, there was an abrupt onset of inflation (within the temporal sampling of the data). We temporally connect the RSAT2 time series to the roughly linear inflation that has continued into 2019 (Fig. 3a) by manually adjusting the time series overlaps. The combined plot (Fig. 3a) of different satellites with differing look directions, incidence angles, and points selected for the time series plot, is suitable for showing the relative deformation behavior to first order. In the case of the ALOS time series, there is no temporal overlap with the RSAT2 time series’ zero deformation in early 2013. Therefore, the plot of the ALOS time series in Fig. 3a is imposed to intersect zero deformation in early 2013, coincident with the start of the RSAT2 time series, since it appears a shorter period of null time series change is in better agreement with the thermal time series null interval from late-2015 to mid-2017. In any case, this choice does not affect our interpretation and discussion (see Methods, where we compare the implications of whether the ALOS time series reaches zero deformation in early 2011 or early 2013).

Figure 2
figure2
Unwrapped SAR interferograms. Image area corresponds to dashed box in Fig. 1a. In each image, the satellite heading (gray arrow) and look direction (black arrow) and ground incidence angle from zenith are shown in the lower left corner. Bottom label in each gives the satellite and master–slave dates. All interferograms are re-wrapped at 10 cm per color cycle. (a, b) ~ 4-year interferograms from ALOS-2 showing cumulative inflation patterns. (c, d, e, g) Example 1-year interferograms from ascending and descending track ALOS-2 and Sentinel-1 satellite data. (f) RADARSAT-2 10-month interferogram spanning the start of inflation. (h) RADARSAT-2 interferogram showing null deformation from early 2013 into 2014. (i) ALOS nearly 3-year interferogram showing deflation from 2008–2011.

Full size image
Figure 3
figure3
Integration of several data. (a) InSAR plus thermal time series. The individual InSAR time series and their 95% error bars (where visible) were manually adjusted relative to the RADARSAT-2 (RSAT2) time series, with the black dashed lines and vertical arrows showing the range of shifts possible for the ALOS time series that do not overlap in time with the RSAT2 observations. The thermal time series is given by the red line and pink 95% confidence bounds. The light and dark gray arrows indicate the possible time lags of the thermal relative to the InSAR time series, with the gray number in parenthesis corresponding to the model number and correlation peak shown in panel (b). (b) Normalized cross-correlation between the mean-removed surface deformation and mean-removed warming at Domuyo volcano (from early 2008 to mid-2018, when both time series are available). Cross-correlation measures the similarity between the surface deformation time series and shifted copies of the surface warming time series as a function of the lag. Normalization is performed with respect to the maximum similarity obtained (in absolute value). Gray band represents the two-standard deviation (95%) confidence interval, defined here by the maximum cross-correlation (in absolute value) obtained between 10,000 zero-mean Gaussian functions and the surface warming time series. Cross-correlation is calculated using Matlab. (c) Cumulative seismic scalar moment, M0, for earthquakes from the Volcano Observatory of the Southern Andes (OVDAS). Locations and density of seismic stations, mostly in Chile, prevent detection of events smaller than about ML 2.

Full size image
We model the ongoing inflation of Domuyo using the cascading adaptive transitional metropolis in parallel (CATMIP) algorithm, implemented in the Caltech-developed AlTar software and generalized at JPL for kinematic and time variable fault and volcano modeling31. AlTar was applied employing the compound dislocation model32 (CDM), which represents a finite ellipsoidal volume change source composed of three orthogonal dislocations. The solution for the CDM source model constrained by the 2015–2019 ALOS-2 ascending and descending linear velocity data set (Supplementary Figs. 8–11) is an oblate (pancake-like) tabular source, gently tilted toward the west (see values in Supplementary Table 1), with depth centered at ~ 6.5 km below the surface. The volume influx rate (ΔV/Δt), or potency rate, where ΔV = 4u(ab + bc + ac) and Δt is the inflation time, is ~ 0.0373 ± 0.0010 (2σ) km3/year.

Our geodetic analysis is complemented with the location map of seismic activity in the area around Domuyo (Fig. 1) and the time series of scalar moment (M0; Fig. 3c). Compared to the geodetic source (Supplementary Fig. 11), we see a pattern of seismicity falling in a semi-anulus around the ellipsoidal source (Supplementary Fig. 11b).

Surface warming
The TIR time series analysis shows that the thermal output of Domuyo volcano (Fig. 3a) featured relatively small undulations from 2004 to 2012, with two maxima around thermal anomaly δT¯¯¯¯¯¯=1.2−1.3∘C that coincides with the onset of the last two gas-driven explosions at the active ‘El Humazo’ hydrothermal field28. Since the beginning of 2012, the thermal emissions declined at a roughly steady rate (~ −0.25∘C/year) through late 2016, with an abrupt increase of thermal emissions over the ~ 1.5 years from ~ mid-2017 through late 2018 (0.3−0.4∘C/year). Note that the thermal emissions beyond late 2018 cannot be retrieved due to the edge effects produced by the filtering technique applied to remove seasonality and noise7, although the most recent value of the anomaly retrieved is δT¯¯¯¯¯¯=1.1±0.3∘C, close to the values observed prior to the 2007 and 2012 gas driven explosions.

Surface deformation versus surface warming
Visual inspection of the evolution of surface deformation and surface warming suggests a possible link between both time series at Domuyo (Fig. 3b). This possible link is assessed through a cross-correlation analysis over the 10-year period (early 2008 to mid-2018) when both time series are available (see Methods section). Cross-correlation analysis shows a high degree of similarity between both time series at three specific time-shifts: first, surface warming is anti-correlated with surface deformation and precedes it by ~ 1.5 years. Second, the two time series are positively correlated; inflation/deflation precedes warming/cooling of the volcanic edifice by ~ 2.7 years. Third, the time series are positively correlated with warming/cooling of the volcanic edifice preceding inflation/deflation by ~ 6.9 years. Independently of the relative importance of the different correlation peaks, which may be affected by the short duration and non-stationarity nature of the time series, this similarity analysis between surface deformation and warming helps us constrain the possible subsurface processes governing the current unrest episode of Domuyo volcano (see Discussion).

Discussion
What do the combination of InSAR and TIR time series tell us about the system?
The integration of geodesy and thermal infrared spectroscopy using cross-correlation analysis allow us to explore possible mechanisms for the current unrest episode of Domuyo. These mechanisms are probably relevant to interpret surface deformation and warming at other systems as well, especially restless calderas10,33.

We find three primary correlation magnitudes with opposite lags and signs (Fig. 3b): (1) a positive lag with negative correlation amplitude, which implies that the InSAR time series follows the thermal time series by ~ 1.5 years with opposite sign; (2) a positive lag with positive correlation amplitude, which implies that the InSAR time series follows the thermal time series by ~ 6.9 years with same sign; and (3) a negative time lag with positive correlation amplitude, which implies that the thermal increase that began in mid-2017 follows the InSAR observed inflation starting in mid-2014 by ~ 2.7 years. These three scenarios give rise to three candidate models to explain the observed deformation and warming time series described below.

Thermal leads geodetic with negative correlation: time-varying permeability model
A positive lag (thermal leads InSAR) with negative correlation could imply a top-down process controlled by permeability changes of the shallow crust. In such a case, the period from 2008 to 2012 is explained by the permeable transport of magmatic gases from the reservoir towards the surface, which enhances shallow hydrothermal activity and warming of the surface7, and depressurizes the reservoir, thus yielding the warming and deflation of the volcanic edifice. A sudden decrease of the effective permeability (i.e., ‘sealing’) of the shallow subsurface, coinciding approximately with the 2012 austral winter hydrothermal explosion, would inhibit the transport of gas from the reservoir, thus resulting in reduction of hydrothermal activity, pressure increase in the reservoir, and corresponding cooling (from 2012 to 2016) and inflation (ongoing since 2014) of the ground surface. In this model, the ~ 1.5-year delay represents the time required for the shallow reservoir to over-pressurize significantly due to the accumulation of gas that cannot efficiently escape from the magma body. When the reservoir pressure increases sufficiently, pore pressure and permeability increase, porous gas flow and hydrothermal activity are enhanced again, and thus the surface gets warmer anew (ongoing since 2017). This implies that inflation should stop in the near future and the volcano should enter into a new deflation phase soon.

A time-varying permeability model would keep Domuyo active without the need for magma injections into the shallow reservoir. In fact, a possibility is that no magma injections have occurred at Domuyo since its last extrusive magmatic activity about 100 ka ago, which implies that the volume of fresh volatile-rich magma that was emplaced in the shallow crust is not yet depleted of exsolved volatiles. The volatile depletion time of a magma body can be estimated with αρmV/Q, where α is the mass fraction of volatiles that can exsolve from the magma at reservoir depths, ρm is the magma density, V is the volume of the magma body, and Q is the average outgassing flux. Assuming realistic values for the different parameters (α≤4%, ρm=2,400kg/m3, Q≥1Kg/s), we find volatile depletion times of ∼30−300 ka for a magma body volume in the range V=1010−1011m3. This would mean that the volume of volatile-rich magma emplaced beneath Domuyo after its last extrusive magmatic activity was, at least, about the same order of magnitude of the magma reservoir volume of Laguna del Maule34. Note, however, that there are some important caveats to consider: (i) It is unlikely that Domuyo has been emitting magmatic gases and heat at the current rates (it is the second most energetic volcano-hydrothermal system in the world after Yellowstone27) without more or less regular magma injections. This is so because passive outgassing during quiescence can lead to significant depressurizations in magma reservoirs, which destabilizes the hydraulic and mechanical equilibrium of the shallow crust, thus fostering magma ascent from the deep plumbing system35,36,37. (ii) It is unclear what mechanism can quickly decrease the effective permeability of the shallow subsurface around 2012. Processes such as mineral precipitation in the pore space are slow38,39, whereas the effect of the austral winter hydrothermal explosion on permeability is expected to be very local (due to the very low magnitude of the explosion). In addition, if they have any effect, explosions in the hydrothermal field are expected to open pathways for gas transport and thus increase, instead of decrease, the permeability. (iii) The current ~ 5-year inflation phase (ongoing since 2014) should mimic the ~ 4-year cooling phase spanning from 2012 to 2016. Inflation phases are not expected to last longer than their leading cooling phases, thus suggesting that the behavior of Domuyo during the period under study is not dominated by permeability variations.

Thermal leads geodetic with positive correlation: volatile release at depth
A positive lag (thermal leads InSAR) with positive correlation could imply a bottom-up process controlled by deep CO2 release from magma rising from the mantle40,41. Carbon dioxide exsolves at high pressures and percolates towards the surface in the early stages of magma migration and reactivation39. This supplies heat to the shallow hydrothermal system of Domuyo, which could enhance fluid circulation and potentially produce boiling in underground aquifers, with the subsequent condensation of steam and release of latent heat beneath the soil42; this could lead to warming of the surface before the magma reaches the shallow crust and the ground deforms elastically. In this model, the ~ 6.9-year delay represents the time required for magma to reach the shallow reservoir relative to the time required for CO2 to enhance hydrothermal activity and increase surface thermal emissions. This implies that the current inflation phase of Domuyo, ongoing since 2014, is indeed reflecting the warming period from 2008 to 2012; hence, the volcano should enter into a new deflation phase soon to reflect the cooling period from 2012 to 2016.

There are, however, some caveats to consider when applying this model to Domuyo: (i) The ~ 6.9-year positive lag with positive correlation reflects the similarity between the edges of the thermal and deformation time series, and thus it may just represent an artifact of the cross-correlation analysis. (ii) The current ~ 5-year inflation phase (ongoing since 2014) should mimic the ~ 4-year warming phase spanning from 2008 to 2012 (note that the longer thermal infrared time series allows us to infer that warming began around 2008 (Fig. 3a)). The current inflation phase would be expected to last no longer than leading warming phases, thus suggesting that the correlation between the deformation and thermal time series of Domuyo during the period under study is not dominated by volatile release at depth.

Geodetic leads thermal with positive correlation: porous flow-induced delay
A negative lag (InSAR leads thermal) with positive correlation could imply a reservoir-driven process controlled by the injection of magma into the shallow reservoir and the slow permeable transfer of gases from the reservoir to the surface. In particular, we propose that the ~ 2.7-year time lag observed corresponds to the time required for the magmatic gases to rise from the reservoir to the shallow subsurface, interact with the hydrothermal system, and warm the surface7.

A porous flow-induced delay model yields values of the effective permeability of the crust that are consistent with typical estimates (see Methods for theoretical basis). In addition, this model is in agreement with observations at restless calderas such as Campi Flegrei, where gas emission time series have been found to lag geodetic time series for large uplifts43. These large uplifts are interpreted as magmatic, whereas lower rates of inflation are considered largely gas-driven10. Similar to Campi Flegrei, if inflation at Domuyo stops without an eruption, it would be expected to give way to deflation as gas percolates out of the system.

Under this model, the 2008–2013 InSAR deflation prior to the current inflation at Domuyo would represent gas percolation for an interval of unknown duration. This geodetic deflation would correspond to the thermal cooling from 2012 to 2016, thus we would expect that geodetic data prior to 2008 would have lower amplitude inflation/deflation undulations similar to the decade of thermal time series before 2012. Considering our three candidate models arising from the cross-correlation analysis between deformation and warming time series, the third model, geodetic leading thermal due to porous flow-induced delay, appears to be the most physically viable.

Towards a unifying model
The porous flow-induced delay model (model 3) provides a feasible explanation for the correlation between the InSAR and thermal time series. In addition, from the InSAR derived model, we can compute the dilatation rate (trace of the strain-rate tensor) assuming an overpressure rate of ~ 0.25–0.30 MPa/year. Although the magnitude of stressing rate is directly related to the source dimensions, the pattern of strain is not sensitive to the stress magnitude, and Lamé parameters of 30 GPa each (Fig. 4). Although such a model does not consider regional stresses, local structures, nor hydrothermal system effects on gas transport, it does provide a first-order agreement with the location of small earthquakes, occurring predominantly in a ring around the deformation source in areas of positive dilatation rate. In addition, this model suggests that gas percolation is a broad-scale phenomenon that is enhanced towards the edges of the ellipsoid (Fig. 4b), thus enhancing a broad-scale interaction with hydrothermal systems. This is consistent with an edifice-scale thermal warming signal.

Figure 4
figure4
Dilatation (trace of the strain tensor) computed for and ellipsoidal cavity with a, b, c axes from the AlTar solution (Table S1) using the boundary element method (BEM) modeling software cutanddisplace71. Gas percolation is expected to be enhanced in areas of positive dilatation (warm colors) and inhibited in areas of negative dilatation (cool colors). (A) Map view for a horizontal slice at 6.45 km depth (same depth as ellipsoidal cavity center). Seismicity is as shown in Fig. 1b. Events deeper than 6.45 km depth are made visible. Here we see that seismicity generally falls in areas of positive dilatation. (B) Horizontal view from the SW, perpendicular the plane striking parallel the a-axis. (C) Horizontal view from the NW, perpendicular the plane striking parallel the b-axis. For (B) and (C), seismicity behind the vertical plane are made visible. Seismicity that appears to be directly above the source in the “blue” areas of negative dilatation are mostly away from the source such that they fall within areas of positive dilatation when viewed from the orthogonal direction, either (C) or (B).

Full size image
The deflation-inflation behavior of the system over the past decade suggests a volcanic system with similarities to observations at restless calderas such as Campi Flegrei, Italy10, and Yellowstone, USA11. Such systems can have significant variations in the duration and intensity of deflation and inflation episodes, sometimes with eruptions, that are attributable to the steady growth of caldera resurgence33. Beyond conceptual models for surface manifestations of magma influx at depth, physics-based laboratory and numerical models suggest that magma emplacement history and the flux of magmatic episodes play roles in determining whether magma remains trapped in the upper crust or leads to dike propagation to the surface44,45. Scaled laboratory models45 suggest that the threshold for propagating dikes that lead to eruption is around 1 m3/s, or about 0.03 km3/year. This is approximately the influx rate we infer for Domuyo (< 0.037 km3/year), and also similar to that of nearby Laguna del Maule15,46 (~ 0.03–0.04 km3/year). It is intriguing that a volcanic system with no recent eruptive activity, and therefore with no expectations that our new observations of volcanic unrest spell an imminent eruption, is subjected to influx rates that are in the neighborhood of values thought possible for eruption.

There are significant simplifying assumptions that we have built into our mechanical models of the volcanic source. Thermomechanical models that account for lateral heterogeneity47 or the effects of a viscoelastic aureole surrounding the modeled reservoir48 can modify the resolved depth, overpressure change, and the spatiotemporal geodetic time series49. The effects of viscoelastic models can either over- or under-predict surface deformation, compared to the analytical elastic solution. Compared to pressure change elastic solutions, viscoelastic models result in higher deformation, implying that the true pressure change required to fit the observed surface displacements is lower13. Whereas, compared to volume change analytical solutions, the viscoelastic models under-predict the deformation, implying that the actual volume change required is greater13. Thus, for our CDM source model for volume change rate, our estimate is more likely to underestimate the true value.

For elastic analytical half-space inversions, as in our study, absolute source dimensions may be poorly resolved. However, this primarily affects the over-pressure change in the system, with larger source dimensions resulting in lower pressure changes for a given volume change. Thus, in the case of our Domuyo source model, we estimate a pressure change, ΔP, less than 0.5 MPa/year, which would imply a minimum of 20 years of inflation at this rate to reach the 10–50 MPa driving pressure considered necessary to propagate silicic magma to the surface50. More robust than pressure change is volume change, which is relatively insensitive to the details of the source dimensions, although for a given source shape it does depend on the source depth—a deeper source requiring greater volume change to produce the same maximum uplift. This is why, for example, our source depth for Domuyo (6.5 km) yields an equal or greater volume change rate compared to Laguna del Maule, whose source is shallower15 (4.5 km), despite the latter’s higher uplift rate.

The nature of the Domuyo volcanic system
More or less regular magma injections into the reservoir is also consistent with the current understanding of Domuyo and with interpretations at other silicic magmatic systems (Fig. 5). Structurally, the primary edifice of Domuyo is considered an intrusive dome emplaced in an anticline that folds Permian to Upper Cretaceous marine deposits51. The central intruded dome is a high-potassium rhyolite with a porphyric to granophyric texture dated at 2.5 Ma and silicic pyroclastic deposits and lava flows51, with Quaternary activity including a 0.72 ± 0.10 Ma basaltic-andesitic to rhyolitic flow26, whose most recent activity is a rhyolitic dome (Cerro Domo) dated at 0.11 ± 0.02 Ma (Fig. 1).

Figure 5
figure5
Conceptual model for the Domuyo volcanic system. View from the SE is parallel the long-axis of the modeled ellipsoidal source. Three potential models are based on the concept of magmatic gas percolation between the magma reservoir and the surface, resulting in surface thermal and deformation time series. Model 1 does not require short-term magma influx (red arrow in deep conduit), but derives from passive magmatic degassing from the reservoir ~ 6.5 km below the mean InSAR data surface elevation of 3 km, with shallow change in crust permeability (κ) restricting gas, and therefore thermal surface flux, causing gases to build up in the reservoir causing it to inflate at some delay. Model 2 derives from deep (~ 30 km) CO2 exsolution from rising magma, resulting in warming leading inflation by more than 5 years. In Model 3, deformation leads heating as magma influx into the system (red arrow) causes reservoir inflation and exsolution of magmatic gas; this results in the transport of magmatic gas towards the surface and interaction with hydrothermal systems, resulting in delayed surface warming.

Full size image
A new analysis of gravity, magnetic, and InSAR data from Sentinel-1 only (during the current inflation phase) describes the state of the system30. Gravity data suggests that the geodetically inferred 7 km deep source could be fed by a volatile-rich magma30. This interpretation is consistent with our second and third models with surface warming driven by an influx of new magma into the shallow (6–7 km depth) reservoir and subsequent gas percolation to the surface and interaction with hydrothermal systems.

Our analysis of surface deformation and surface warming over the last two decades shows clear signs of unrest compatible with Domuyo being an active volcanic system. In particular, the InSAR time series shows an elliptical deformation pattern that projects into the radar LOS for ascending and descending tracks consistent with an upper crustal source. This is confirmed by our solutions for an ellipsoidal source. A sub-horizontal tabular source at ~ 6.5 km depth beneath the surface is deeper than considered possible in granitic crust52, is also deeper than the proposed hydrothermal source depths29, and suggests the location of the body supplying magmatic gases to the hydrothermal system27,29. Hence, the location of our modeled deformation source suggests a long-lived reservoir that is centered beneath the central intrusive dome of Domuyo that we interpret as the likely source for the most recent extrusive eruptions at Cerro Domo and other similar eruptive centers. The aureole of positive dilatation beyond the modeled source is expected to favor gas percolation in the direction of the hydrothermal system, in addition to providing pathways back toward the volcano summit (Fig. 4), producing edifice-scale warming. The surface warming time series shows a thermal variability of the edifice of Domuyo similar to that found at other active volcanoes featuring recent magmatic and gas-driven eruptions7, with current thermal emissions at Domuyo on the same order as those observed prior to the last two hydrothermal explosions in 2007 and 2012.

Our findings for Domuyo are relevant to long-term build-up of magma at depth, as it relates to the growth of shallow reservoirs and possible future eruption53,54, versus long-term trapping of melt in the crust. This includes, for example, the formation of plutons55 and the remobilization of melt within mush and plutons as part of transcrustal magma reservoirs56,57. In the case of Domuyo, there is still a great lack of knowledge regarding its geologic history and its present state, although inclusion of gravity observations suggests an influx of melt into the shallow crustal reservoir30. The long repose time (~ 100 ka) is not exceptional for large silicic magmatic systems58, composed of complex volumes of melt and mush59,60. For example, the current activity, if due to magma influx, might represent an incremental injection of melt into a stacked sill complex54 that for a longer-lived (> 1 Ma) system such as Domuyo, with intrusion rates on the order of 0.001 km3 year−1, could build reservoirs capable of large eruptions61. The current rate would likely have to be maintained over hundreds of thousands of years in order to approach super-eruption size62, highly unlikely to occur soon given the recent deflation preceding the current high influx rate. The current influx rate and modeled source volume (on order 100 km3) might be capable of a significant eruption, although remobilization of larger volumes cannot be ruled out60. Certainly, we lack sufficient information about the system to develop dynamical models capable of making quantitative, statistically based, probability estimates of future system dynamical behavior.

While the residence times for silicic volcanic systems may be long, remobilization and the run-up to large eruptions may be rapid, with the final batch of mafic recharge occurring over a matter of weeks in the case of the 1912 Katmai, Alaska eruption63. However, in general, there is evidence to suggest that the longer the repose time the longer the run-up to eruption is likely to be64. To unravel the complexity of a system and forecast its future behavior, as well as to understand whether a new intrusion of magma represents a long process of system evolution or resurgence, requires a vast improvement in our understanding of the state of a given system and integration of diverse time series to track changes in system parameters.

We now have intriguing evidence that Domuyo is a system that is producing deformation and warming signals that are significant and, more importantly, that are comparable to other active volcanoes. How long this system could sustain the current inflation and warming rates, and by inference, build up in pressure in the reservoir before an eruption might begin, is yet to be determined. However, it is important to highlight that: (i) The current inflation phase was preceded by 3-to-5-years of deflation, thus suggesting that we are detecting the regular behavior of this volcano (similar to other calderas in the world) and that an imminent dike propagation and magmatic eruption is not likely. (ii) The current thermal emissions are close to the values found prior to the previous 2007 and 2012 hydrothermal explosions. Hence, although we cannot anticipate an imminent dike propagation and large magmatic eruption, our analysis suggests that the hydrothermal system beneath Domuyo is close to critical pressure values, and thus small hydrothermal gas explosions might occur relatively soon. The InSAR and thermal time series we present show the importance of long-term (decadal) observations in order to track system changes through cross-comparison of multiple observation types to constrain time varying processes. As we have shown with the InSAR, thermal, and seismicity time series, their combination leads to a more focused physical model for the system, while pointing to additional observations and modeling that are needed to constrain the system and to compare with other silicic volcanoes.

Conclusions
We have combined, for the first time, InSAR and edifice-scale thermal warming time series that provide new constraints on possible physical mechanisms for unrest at large silicic systems. We applied a cross-correlation method to find the correlation amplitudes and relative time lags of the InSAR and thermal time series, revealing that they can be both positively and negatively correlated, with positive and negative thermal lags. These give rise to three candidate models for the current activity of Domuyo volcano (Fig. 5): (1) time-varying permeability of the shallow crust; (2) deep CO2 release from mantle magma ascent; and (3) magma-driven reservoir inflation with time-delayed gas percolation. Although the short duration of the time series and the mechanical model alone do not uniquely distinguish between the three aforementioned candidates, the latter (model 3) appears more consistent with the on-going inflation and warming episodes.

Despite the likely magma injection into the shallow reservoir of Domuyo, the integration of long-term surface deformation and surface warming analysis suggests that the volcano is not likely to erupt magma soon, and that it is currently exhibiting a regular caldera-like behavior, with multiple inflation and deflation episodes. However, the possibility that small hydrothermal explosions may occur soon cannot be rejected since thermal emissions are similar to those observed prior to the 2007 and 2012 events. In general, our combination of edifice-scale thermal and geodetic time series provides a new methodological approach for identifying and discriminating between physical mechanisms of unrest at large silicic systems. This will allow a more comprehensive assessment of the current state of volcanoes, as well as drive observations and model development in order to forecast future behavior.

Methods
InSAR processing and time series analysis
We explore surface deformation using synthetic aperture radar (SAR) data from four satellite systems: the Canadian Space Agency (CSA) RADARSAT-2 (RSAT2) C-band (5.6 cm wavelength) sensor; the Japan Aerospace Exploration Agency (JAXA) ALOS PALSAR, and ALOS-2 PALSAR-2 L-band (23.8 cm wavelength) sensors; and the Copernicus Sentinel-1a/b C-band (5.6 cm wavelength) satellites operated by the European Space Agency (ESA). For each sensor, we compute InSAR maps of relative ground surface deformation projected into the radar line-of-sight (LOS) direction. Winter snow cover at Domuyo mostly limits the InSAR season to late spring to early fall (December through April), with the start of the season depending on the amount of snow in the previous winter and its termination depending on the onset of new snow in the following winter. The L-band ALOS and ALOS-2 satellites had, in general, better coherence and a slightly longer season compared to RADARSAT-2 and Sentinel-1′s C-band radars, although differences in bandwidth, imaging modes, and temporal sampling affect the performance for each SAR dataset.

Each sensor’s data were processed into differential interferograms of surface deformation, after removal of Earth curvature and topographic effects, with different processing software. For RSAT2, only descending track data were available, and were processed at the Canada Centre for Remote Sensing using the Gamma processing package65. ALOS data were available from both ascending and descending tracks; however, large baseline drift of the ALOS satellite limited the interferograms that could be successfully computed. ALOS data were computed at the Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL) using the JPL-Caltech (California Institute of Technology) Repeat Orbit Interferometry Package (ROI_PAC) software version 3.1. ALOS-2 and Sentinel-1 SAR data were processed at JPL using the InSAR Scientific Computing Environment (ISCE) package developed at JPL, Caltech, and Stanford University66. For Sentinel-1 processing, we used the Advanced Rapid Imaging and Analysis (ARIA) Project at JPL to compute interferograms. ROI_PAC and ISCE processing used the SRTM 30 m digital elevation model (DEM) to correct for topography. Interferogram unwrapping was performed using the SNAPHU software67 implemented in ISCE. Plots of interferograms used in the analysis are given in the Supporting Information (Supporting Figs. 1–6).

Both ALOS-2 and Sentinel-1 satellites provide data at Domuyo beginning in the Austral summer of late 2014 or early 2015 through April 2019. We processed a mix of summer-to-summer interferograms (one year maximum for RADARSAT-2 and Sentinel-1; one to four years for ALOS and ALOS-2) and short-term interferograms within each summer season (Fig. 2, Supplementary Fig. 7). Since Domuyo lies in a relatively dry area, the main challenges to InSAR coherence are residual snow and glaciers (especially during the early part of the summer) and volcano topography, which causes geometric effects (layover) and is prone to topographically correlated tropospheric phase delay residuals in the interferograms. The latter is somewhat mitigated by the high elevation (most of the study area is above 2000 m, with the average data elevation used in the modeling at 2,952 m) and relatively dry atmosphere.

ALOS-2 interferograms from ascending path 34 (A34) and descending paths 129 (D129) and 130 (D130) show elliptical patterns of positive line-of-sight (LOS) displacements. This displacement represents movement of the ground towards the satellite radar, that skew towards the satellite look direction for each path, which is consistent with inflation from a buried source (Fig. 2). Differences in the shapes of the observed LOS elliptical patterns depend on the geometry and depth of the source for each imaging mode and path. Over four years (2015–2019), up to ~ 60 cm LOS displacements are observed.

Sentinel-1 interferograms are consistent with the ALOS-2 results, but due to the shorter wavelength and deformation rates around 12 cm/year, interferograms longer than about one year have spatially dense fringes (2π phase cycles), prohibiting unwrapping without significant errors. The ascending and descending tracks of Sentinel-1 also show a similar skewing of the interferogram patterns toward the radar LOS, in accord with an inflating source at depth (Fig. 2).

One-year interferograms from both ALOS-2 and Sentinel-1 showed similar amounts of inflation in year-to-year interferograms from 2015–2019 (and compared to amounts for 4-year interferograms from ALOS-2), suggesting that the deformation began before either satellite’s mission began. This prompted us to look for satellite data that were acquired prior to 2015. A search of ESA’s ERS and Envisat satellites’ C-band SAR acquisitions found no viable pairs during the mid-1990′s through 2009 interval. This was due to both a lack of data and, when data were available, they either had perpendicular baselines (orbital separations) or dopplers (related to radar pointing direction due to changes in satellite attitude variations) that were too large to produce viable interferograms.

ALOS data were processed for the late 2007—early 2011 time period. Only one interferogram was possible for the D412 (descending) path. For the ascending path (A113), 10 SAR images were processed, with only a few producing viable interferograms due to the ALOS baseline drift in the data. Nonetheless, the one D412 interferogram and two of the A113 interferograms show a relatively weak, yet consistent pattern centered on Domuyo volcano (Fig. 2). However, rather than inflation, they show deflation between early 2008 through early 2011 at a lower rate than the post 2014 inflation.

This left RADARSAT-2 to potentially fill the temporal gap between gentle deflation before 2011 and stronger inflation since late 2014. RADARSAT-2 data were available from two acquisition modes: F0W2, a descending track with data from March 2013 to April 2015; and XF0W2, also a descending track, with data from September 2015—mid-2017. The latter track confirms the ALOS-2 and Sentinel-1 observations; but unfortunately, most of the data are from the winter time, so no significant information was provided by the XF0W2 data set. In contrast, the F0W2 data do span the critical interval showing inflation onset (see Fig. 2; Supplementary Figs. 1–6).

We compute InSAR time series from sets of interconnected interferograms using the GIAnT software package68 in the NSBAS mode (Supplementary Fig. 7). Output products include both the linear velocity map as well as the full time series. We use the raw (unfiltered) time series, with the displacement uncertainties for each epoch computed from the standard deviation in LOS displacement for a 100-sample set of pixels centered on the point of interest. In Supplementary Fig. 7, we plot the linear velocity map and the InSAR time series for a pixel in the area of peak deformation for each of the ALOS-2, Sentinel-1, RADARSAT-2, and ALOS time series.

From these time series, we see from RSAT2 data that there was no resolvable deformation between 2013 and early 2014. From June 2014 to September 2014, there was an abrupt onset of inflation (within the temporal sampling of the data). We temporally connect the RSAT2 time series to the roughly linear inflation that has continued into 2019 (Fig. 3a) by manually adjusting the time series overlaps. Despite this approach being imprecise because we use different satellites differing in look directions, incidence angles, and points selected for the time series plot, it is suitable for showing the relative deformation behavior at first order. If one were to implement time-variable source modeling of the longer time series, then velocity shifts of each time series could be formally estimated as part of the Bayesian estimation process. In the case of the ALOS time series, there is no temporal overlap with the RSAT2 time series’ zero deformation in early 2013. Therefore, the plot of the ALOS time series in Fig. 3a is plotted to intersect zero deformation in early 2013, coincident with the start of the RSAT2 time series. This was chosen for our plotting purposes since it appears a shorter period of null time series change is in better agreement with the thermal time series null interval from late-2015 to mid-2017. However, this choice does not affect the interpretation and discussion (see Sect. 2.3, where we compare the implications of whether the ALOS time series reaches zero deformation in early 2011 or early 2013).

Geodetic source modeling
AlTar was run using 4,096 parallel Markov chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) chains, with 1,000 successive steps in which the prior probability distribution for each parameter becomes a progressively more focused Gaussian distribution from its starting uniform range of values. To constrain our model, we use the ALOS-2 linear velocities from the A034 and D129 time series inversions, using a model-based quad-tree approach69 with a 10 × 16 km sill at 7 km depth to down-sample the data and compute the covariance matrix. This produced 562 and 454 data points for the A034 and D129 data, respectively.

The model used in the AlTar inversion is the CDM which represents a finite ellipsoidal volume change source composed of three orthogonal dislocations32. The model has ten parameters: three for location (x, y, z); three semi-axes lengths (a, b, c); three axial rotations (ωx, ωy, ωz), allowing for arbitrary orientation and axes lengths; and uniform opening u applied to each dislocation in the model. The CDM can approximate shapes ranging from equidimensional, to pancake-shaped, to cigar-shaped, to pipe-like32.

Seismic data
Seismic data are extracted from the Volcano Observatory of the Southern Andes (OVDAS) database, for the time interval from January 2013 through July 2019. We use the seismic networks placed over Laguna del Maule, Longaví, Nevado de Chillán and Tátara volcanoes, located between 40 to 70 km of distance from the Domuyo area. The horizontal and vertical errors of the seismic locations obtained are less than 3 km, providing a good representation of the local seismicity occurring during recent years close to Domuyo volcanic edifice. A total of 83 seismic events were detected, with ML higher than 2.0; the minimum magnitude to obtain locations with OVDAS seismic stations. A remarkable aspect is the increase in seismic occurrence and seismic energy between 2016 and 2019, especially in March 2019 when the most energetic earthquake (ML 4.1) was recorded (Fig. 3c).

TIR data processing
We explore the thermal emissions of the flanks of Domuyo volcano using a new algorithm that examines the thermal infrared (TIR) data provided by the MODIS instruments aboard NASA’s Terra and Aqua satellites7. In particular, we downloaded (from the NASA Earth Data Search site https://earthdata.nasa.gov/) the Level-1B Radiance product (MOD021KM/MYD021KM) and the Level-1A Geolocation product (MOD03/MYD03) to analyze a more than 17-year record (from 04-July-2002 to 20-August-2019), of day- and night-time scenes, from MODIS Band 31 (10.780–11.280 μm). This gives a total of ~ 3.8 TB of memory, 28,407 scenes, and average sampling rate of ~ 4–5 scenes per day at Domuyo’s latitude, allowing us to update Domuyo’s warming time series from that presented in Girona et al. 7 The algorithm computes a statistical metric, the median anomaly (δT¯¯¯¯¯¯), that tracks the long-term (~ years) variations of the median brightness temperature of a volcanic edifice relative to the median brightness temperature of the region surrounding the volcano. The median anomaly δT¯¯¯¯¯¯ is computed following the six main steps summarized below7.

First, we choose a target area around Domuyo volcano on the order of At∼1,400km2 (which corresponds to a total of N≈200−1,350 pixels, depending on the observation angle of each scene) and an auxiliary area of Aaux∼800km2, embedded within At, that covers the edifice and includes the hydrothermal field at the southwest flank of the volcano27,29. Second, we calculate the median spectral radiance of the M=11 pixels with lowest spectral radiance (Lc,M), as well as the median spectral radiance of the K=N−101 pixels with largest spectral radiance (Lh,K), of the target area At. In the absence of clouds, the pixels with the lowest spectral radiance and the pixel with median spectral radiance Lc,M fall into the subarea Aaux, whereas the pixels with largest spectral radiance Lh,K fall outside the subarea Aaux; this is so because the highest levels of the volcano are colder due to altitude. If the pixel with median spectral radiance Lc,M does not fall into the subarea Aaux, and/or the pixel with median spectral radiance fall into the subarea Aaux, the scene is discarded from the analysis to reduce cloud-related noise. This yields 30% of scenes discarded and a total of 19,982 useful scenes for the ~ 17-year period under study. Third, Lc,M and Lh,K are converted to brightness temperature (Tc,M and Th,K, respectively) using Planck’s function and the central wavelength of Band 31, and then we calculate the difference ΔTM,K=Tc,M−Th,K. Fourth, we calculate the daily median of the differences of brightness temperature, ΔT¯¯¯¯¯¯¯¯M,K; the resulting time series (ΔT¯¯¯¯¯¯¯¯M,K(t), where t is time) displays as one data point per day with a seasonal component, noise, and 17% gaps (due to the scenes discarded in step 2 of the algorithm) that are filled through linear interpolation. Fifth, ΔT¯¯¯¯¯¯¯¯M,K(t) is filtered through an iterative technique based on wavelet and moving median filters that efficiently removes seasonality and noise. This yields the median anomaly or δT¯¯¯¯¯¯, which is negative (because Tc,M<Th,K), has units of temperature, and captures long-term (>1 year) variations of the brightness temperature of the coldest parts of volcanic edifices relative to the region surrounding the volcano. Sixth, the uncertainty of the δT¯¯¯¯¯¯ time series is assessed through a combination of bootstrapping and Monte Carlo techniques. For simplicity, δT¯¯¯¯¯¯ (with its uncertainty) is rescaled, so it is always ≥0.

Cross-correlation of deformation and warming time series
We assess the possible link between deformation and warming through a cross-correlation analysis over the 10-year period when both time series are available (from early 2008 to mid-2018). We linearly interpolate the deformation to one data value per day, mimicking the effective sampling rate of the surface warming time series. In addition, we perform the cross-correlation analysis for two cases: (1) when assuming that ALOS InSAR time series reaches zero deformation (subsidence stops) in early 2013, coincident with the start of the RSAT2 data (red curve in Fig. 3b); and (2) when assuming that ALOS reaches zero at the end of the ALOS data in early 2011 (blue curve in Fig. 3b; see Supplementary Fig. 12 for a more thorough comparison of time series shifts). Both cases yield similar results: cross-correlation analysis shows a high degree of similarity between both time series at three specific time-shifts (Fig. 3b). It is worth highlighting that both the positive and negative correlations are highly significant, with the positives being smaller (in absolute value) than the negative (< 60% vs. 100% of normalized cross-correlation).

Porous flow-induced time delay
We assume that a good proxy for the timescale of heat transport to the surface is the timescale of permeable flow of gas from the reservoir to the hydrothermal system (justified because the remaining processes occur at shallower levels beneath the surface). In such a case, we can estimate the time lag (τ) between surface deformation and warming in terms of the mean seepage velocity (v(z)¯¯¯¯¯¯¯¯¯) of gas through the crust:

τ=Lv(z)¯¯¯¯¯¯¯¯¯=L1L∫z=Lz=0v(z)dz=L2∫z=Lz=0v(z)dz,
(1)
where L is the depth to the top of the magma source as measured from the hydrothermal system (which roughly equals the magma source depth because hydrothermal systems are typically much shallower), v(z) is the local seepage velocity through the crust, and z is the distance measured positive from the top of the magma reservoir. The seepage velocity can be estimated from the following constitutive equation (Darcy’s law):

v(z)=−κμφdp(z)dz
(2)
where κ and φ are the effective permeability and porosity of the crust, respectively; μ is the gas viscosity; and p(z) is the pressure with depth (measured positive upwards) in the crust. Replacing Eq. (2) into the integral of Eq. (1) yields:

τ=−L2κμφ∫z=Lz=0dp(z)dzdz=μφL2κ(Pr−Pc)
(3)
where Pr is the reservoir pressure, Pc is the pressure in the hydrothermal system near the surface, and we can approximate Pr−Pc≈ρgL, where ρgL is the lithostatic pressure at reservoir depths, ρ is the crust density, and g is gravity. Substituting into Eq. (3), we obtain the diffusion time, or time required for the gas to ascend near the surface from a magma reservoir:

τ=μφLκρg.
(4)
Equation (4) reveals that, under the assumptions considered, the time delay between deformation and surface warming at Domuyo is directly proportional to the crust porosity and reservoir depth, and inversely proportional to crust permeability and density. This equation allows us to constrain the effective permeability of the crust from our geodetic and thermal infrared analysis. In particular, using realistic values of the parameters, i.e., μ=10−5Pa s, φ=10−2−10−4, L=5,700m (top of the reservoir, as inferred from InSAR analysis), ρ=3,000kg/m3, g=9.8m/s2, and τ=2.7years (as inferred from the comparison between InSAR and thermal data), we find an effective permeability in the range κ≈10−18−10−16m2. This is consistent with typical estimates of shallow crust permeability in volcanic areas70.

Kolumbo submarine volcano lies 7 km NE of Santorini caldera and its last eruption which occurred in 1650 AD, caused damage and casualties to the nearby islands. Here a simple model of a chamber, containing silicic magma underlain by a smaller quantity of mafic magma, is utilised in order to understand the chamber behaviour during the 1650 AD eruption. Results show that in order to reproduce the duration (83–281 days) and the dense rock equivalent volume (∼2km3) of the eruption, initial overpressure in the chamber should be around 10 MPa and the mafic magma should occupy up to 5% of the chamber volume. It is found that the time needed to inject mafic magma equal to 1–15% of the chamber volume varies between 1.4–13.7 ka, if the radius of the chamber is about 1500 m as inferred from tomographic images. These long recurrence times agree well with the small number of eruptions (N=5) within a period of > 70 ka and suggest that an eruption in the near future is unlikely. Volcanic activity at Kolumbo is probably triggered by a combination of exsolved volatiles and a small but steady influx of mafic melt in the chamber.

Introduction
The formation, growth and evolution of magma chambers represent fundamental issues in volcanological studies and constitute the basis for the formulation of models of how volcanoes erupt1,2,3,4. Magma chambers residing in the upper crust (under lithostatic pressure of 200 ± 50 MPa) usually contain evolved magma which consists of variable amounts of melt, crystals and volatiles collectively known as ‘mush’5. A common mechanism for triggering an eruption in such a chamber is the injection of high temperature, low viscosity mafic magma at its base6,7,8. The injection has the effect of not only generating overpressure by adding more material in the magma chamber, but also heating the evolved magma and remobilising it. Evidence for this triggering mechanism comes from petrological observations in several arc volcanoes around the world that reveal different degrees of mixing of the two magma types in erupted products9.

Figure 1
figure1
(a) Map of the southern Aegean showing the distribution of arc volcanoes (yellow stars), the isodepths of the Wadati–Benioff zone (after Ref.11), as well as the motion vectors of the African lithosphere and the Aegean upper plate (after Ref.10). (b) A magnified map of the area around the Santorini caldera where the location of the Kolumbo submarine volcano is shown as a red triangle. (c) Cross-section across the Kolumbo volcano edifice that depicts the succession of five layers (K1–K5) that have been deposited during volcanic activity (after Ref.15). The different parts of the Figure have been prepared using Generic Mapping Tools (GMT, http://gmt.soest.hawaii.edu), CorelDraw (https://www.coreldraw.com) and Adobe illustrator version CS6 (https://www.adobe.com/products/illustrator.html).

Full size image
Figure 2
figure2
Cartoon that summarizes the different stages of the 1650 AD eruption of Kolumbo based on the study of Cantner et al.17. The red arrows point to the specific dates that mark the onset of each stage (see text for more details). The starting point of the submarine eruption could be March 1650 AD, or 14 September of the same year. The Figure was drafted using CorelDraw (https://www.coreldraw.com) and Adobe illustrator version CS6 (https://www.adobe.com/products/illustrator.html).

Full size image
The southern Aegean hosts a chain of volcanoes that have been formed due to the subduction of the African lithosphere underneath the Eurasian plate10,11 (Fig. 1a). Kolumbo is one of them, located at a distance of 7 km from the island complex of Santorini caldera (Fig. 1b) with its crater area lying at a depth of 500 m below sea level. Even though Kolumbo is very close to Santorini, geochemical studies indicate that there is no petrogenetic link between the two magmatic systems12. Local earthquake tomography revealed the existence of a low velocity body at a depth of 5–7 km underneath Kolumbo13, a depth range which is also consistent with the distribution of earthquakes and the local stress field14. High-resolution seismic reflection profiles along its submarine edifice have imaged five distinct layers (K1–K5 in Fig. 1c) of eruption deposits15. Except from the top layer K5 which corresponds to the deposits of the 1650 AD eruption, the age of the other four layers is very uncertain and these may have accumulated over a period of > 70 ka or even up to 600 ka. The 1650 AD eruption was accompanied by pyroclastic flows and a tsunami that inundated the eastern coast of the island of Thira16,17,18. The presence of mafic enclaves in the evolved erupted products of the 1650 AD eruption as well as in the deposits of layer K2 suggests that the injection of mafic magma may have acted as a triggering mechanism in both eruptions12,17.

The eruption of Kolumbo in 1650 AD has been studied in detail by Cantner et al.17 who analysed its deposits in terms of petrography/geochemistry and suggested an interpretation for the physical processes that took place during the eruption. Here only a brief description of the course of events during the eruption as well as the key geochemical/petrological results will be given, referring the reader to Cantner et al.17 for more details. Already since March 1650 the inhabitants of the nearby islands started experiencing damaging earthquakes and subterranean roaring that reached a climax around 14 September of the same year. This time period probably corresponds to the pressurisation of the magma chamber and the formation of conduits that reached the seafloor, initiating the submarine stage of the eruption (Fig. 2). By 27 September the first plumes could be seen rising above the sea surface along with pumice rafts floating on the sea. The eruption at this point became subaerial, producing pumice that either separated from the plume and floated on the sea surface, or sank underneath generating vertical gravity flows. Explosions started occurring from 28 September onwards, while the eruption plume covered a large portion of the sky producing lightning and ejected incandescent rocks. This marks the onset of phreatomagmatic activity, where the hot magma came into contact with sea water at atmospheric conditions rather than near the seafloor where hydrostatic pressure is high (cf. Fig. 2). These phenomena continued to occur for more than 2 months, causing house roofs to collapse under the weight of the accumulated ash and the death of people/animals from inhalation of toxic fumes.

The eruption finally ended on 6 December 1650 when all phenomena subsided and the sea water became clear again. The duration of the eruption, as judged by the historical accounts described above, may vary from a minimum of 83 days (∼ 0.22 years) to a maximum of 281 days (∼ 0.76 years) depending on the choice of the starting date of the submarine eruption (March versus mid-September 1650). The bulk volume of the eruption deposits, inferred from the seismic reflection profiles around Kolumbo15, ranges from a minimum of 4.2 km3 to a maximum of 6.3 km3. Estimates of dense rock equivalent (DRE) volume yielded a value of 2 km3 or slightly larger19.

Geological samples in the form of push/box cores and rocks from the crater wall of Kolumbo were obtained during several cruises in the area (for more information see Cantner et al.17). Geochemical analysis of the pumice samples revealed a rhyolitic composition with SiO2 between 73.7–74.2 wt.%, indicating that the original magma was more evolved than the one that produced the pyroclastics of the nearby Santorini caldera. The volatile content was determined from melt inclusions and it was found to vary from 1.9 to 8.3 wt.% with a median value of 6.5 wt.% that serves as a conservative estimate. Pre-eruption temperature and equilibration pressure of the magma were found to be 750 ∘C and 150 MPa respectively (for methodological details see Cantner et al.17). This pre-eruption pressure corresponds to a depth of about 5 km and correlates well with the location of the low-velocity anomaly found in tomographic images13. As mentioned earlier, a significant finding of the petrographic analysis was the presence of mafic inclusions in the eruption products that suggest the injection of mafic magma in the chamber prior to the eruption. Despite the fact that Kolumbo represents a source of significant volcanic hazard for the nearby islands, there has not been any study to-date that has modeled the magma chamber evolution during the 1650 AD eruption and has drawn conclusions about the long-term eruptive potential of this volcano. The present work tries to fill this gap by addressing three interrelated topics: (1) what were the conditions inside the magma chamber during the 1650 AD eruption, (2) how these conditions can affect the frequency, duration and size of eruptions, and (3) what might be the long-term eruptive behaviour of Kolumbo’s magma chamber. In the next sections the physical parameters summarised above will be used in order to model the evolution of the magma chamber and obtain answers to these questions.

Figure 3
figure3
Cartoon that illustrates the geometrical configuration of the model magma chamber beneath Kolumbo (see text for more details).

Full size image
Results
Simulations of the 1650 AD eruption
The model employed in this study assumes that the conditions in the chamber generate the necessary overpressure to drive a fracture to the surface and start the eruption. The magma chamber itself is considered as a sphere of volume V and radius R whose roof lies at a depth H below the seafloor while it is connected with a conduit of radius r (Fig. 3). The chamber contains a percentage φ of mafic magma and the remainder is occupied by silicic magma of volume (1-φ)V. Heat is then transferred from the hotter mafic to the cooler silicic magma, causing dissolution of its crystals and its remobilisation. The opposite process takes place in the mafic magma that is cooling and this causes crystallisation of minerals and saturation of the residual melt with volatiles. The model assumes thermodynamic and chemical equilibrium between the different phases and that bubbles and crystals stay in the layer in which they formed. Heat conducted to the wall rock around the chamber and the recharge rate of mafic magma are not included, since both processes affect the magma chamber over timescales much larger than the timescale of the eruption.

Some of the parameters required by the model can be constrained by the results summarised previously or by assuming reasonable, in a volcanological sense, values. The radius R of the magma chamber is taken equal to 1,500 m as inferred from local earthquake tomography13 and its depth H as 5 km following Cantner et al.17. The temperature of the silicic magma is assumed to be 750 ∘C (= 1,023 K) with a viscosity of 107 Pa s, while the mafic magma is considered to have a temperature of 1,200 ∘C (= 1,473 K). A lower temperature for the mafic magma of 1,050 ∘C (= 1,323 K) would have a negligible effect on the time variation of eruption rate and volume, but would slightly change the total volume of erupted material by 0.02–0.3 km3. The silicic magma is assumed to be in a mushy state with a mass fraction of crystals equal to 0.4 which is slightly below the rheological lockup limit. The mafic magma is considered to be crystal free and to contain a mass fraction of volatiles equal to 4 wt.%. A list of parameters whose values have been adopted in this way can be found in Table 1. The remaining parameters, namely conduit radius r, initial overpressure Δp0, percentage of mafic magma φ and volatile (H2O vapor) mass fraction, are varied so as to understand how they affect the duration and volume output of the eruption.

Table 1 List of the values that have been adopted for the model calculations described in the text (all symbols are defined in section “Methods”).
Full size table
Figure 4
figure4
Summary of the model simulation results for the variation of eruption rate as a function of time for a range of: (a) initial overpressure (other parameters held constant: r=30 m, φ=0.1, 6.5 wt.% of H2O), (b) conduit radius (other parameters held constant: Δp=10 MPa, φ=0.1, 6.5 wt.% of H2O), (c) mass fraction of volatiles (H2O vapor) of the silicic magma (other parameters held constant: r=30 m, φ=0.1, Δp=10 MPa), (d) percentage of mafic magma that occupies the chamber (other parameters held constant: r=30 m, Δp=10 MPa, 6.5 wt.% of H2O).

Full size image
The duration of the eruption is estimated by considering the variation with time of the eruption rate curve from its initial value until it becomes zero (Fig. 4). In the first set of simulations, the initial overpressure in the chamber is varied in the range between 10–40 MPa while the other parameters are kept fixed (r=30 m, φ=0.1, 6.5 and 4 wt.% of H2O for silicic and mafic magma respectively). Initial overpressure has a strong effect on the eruption rate, obtaining a maximum value of over 600 m3/s, but has a negligible effect on the eruption duration (cf. Fig. 4a). On the contrary, the conduit radius has a strong effect on both the duration and the eruption rate with the former obtaining a maximum value of 1 year when r=20 m and the latter taking a maximum value of more than 600 m3/s when r=40 m (cf. Fig. 4b). Rather than just using the conservative estimate of H2O mass fraction (6.5 wt.%) for the silicic magma, a range of values between 6.5–12 wt.% was used also for the purpose of investigating the influence of this parameter on the results. Although the mass fraction of volatiles had no effect on the eruption rate, it increased the duration of the eruption from 0.3 to 0.7 years when its value became 12 wt.% (cf. Fig. 4c). The percentage of mafic magma in the chamber is perhaps the least constrained of all the parameters and in the simulations it was varied from 1 to 15%. At this point it should be mentioned that the cooling rate of the mafic magma is inversely proportional to its volume20, therefore for φ<0.1 a faster cooling rate was assumed (10−6 K/s) and when φ≥0.1 the cooling rate was set to a value one order of magnitude smaller (10−7 K/s). Figure 4d shows that the percentage of mafic magma within the given range has negligible effects on both the duration and the eruption rate.

Figure 5
figure5
Same as in Fig. 4 but this time depicting erupted volume as a function of time for a range of: (a) initial overpressure, (b) conduit radius, (c) mass fraction of volatiles, and (d) percentage of mafic magma.

Full size image
Figure 6
figure6
Diagram showing the variation of the recharge time as a function of chamber radius and of the percentage of mafic magma. The coloured circles represent the results of 40,000 Monte Carlo simulations (see text for more details). Note that tomographic images imply a radius of about 1,500 m for the Kolumbo magma chamber.

Full size image
Figure 7
figure7
Summary of Monte Carlo simulations for the different magma chamber timescales and θ1,θ2 proxies as a function of: (a) chamber radius R, (b) overpressure Δp, (c) viscosity of the crust η, and (d) mass injection rate M˙in.

Full size image
The time history of the erupted volume is also calculated for the same range of each parameter and the total volume erupted is estimated by integrating the area under each curve (Fig. 5). The initial value of overpressure seems to have a strong influence on the volume of erupted material with a maximum value of 11 km3 when Δp0 is equal to 40 MPa (cf. Fig. 5a). When the conduit radius is varied the three curves appear to exhibit a shift in time, but produce essentially the same volume of erupted material (cf. Fig. 5b). The mass fraction of volatiles in the silicic magma also has an important effect on the erupted volume producing a minimum of 2.7 km3 for 6.5 wt.% and a maximum value of 4.6 km3 for 12 wt.% (cf. Fig. 5c). More importantly, simulations show that the percentage of mafic magma that occupies the base of the chamber has a small but visible effect on the erupted volume. Mafic magma corresponding to 1% of the chamber results in an erupted volume of 2 km3 that can reach a value of up to 3 km3 when the percentage of mafic magma becomes 15% (cf. Fig. 5d).

The results of these simulations should be viewed under the prism of observations related to the 1650 AD Kolumbo eruption, and more specifically its duration and erupted volume as outlined previously. The estimated duration of the eruption (0.22–0.76 years) tends to favor a conduit with a radius of about 30 m corresponding to an eruption rate of ∼ 160 m3/s which can be considered rather low for an eruption that dispersed ash up to western Turkey19. However, it has to be noted that the approximation of the conduit shape as a cylinder is a necessary model simplification and that at the initial stages of the eruption the conduit most likely was fissure-like, becoming wider and more cylindrical as the eruption progressed. It is thus quite possible that the eruption started with a smaller size conduit, attaining an eruption rate of several hundred cubic meters per second at later stages when the conduit became larger. A comparison of the total erupted volume during each simulation and the DRE volume of the 1650 AD eruption (∼ 2 km3) suggests that the initial overpressure should have been around 10 MPa. The simulations also imply that a total erupted volume of 2–2.5 km3 can be produced with the injection of up to 5% of mafic magma in the chamber (cf. Fig. 5d). Based on these results the duration of any future eruption will critically depend on conduit geometry and the mass fraction of volatiles contained in the silicic magma, while the erupted volume will also depend on the percentage of mafic magma injected in the chamber.

Long-term behaviour: mass injection rate and eruption frequency
A first assessment of the eruption frequency at Kolumbo has been made by Hübscher et al.15 who suggested that the deposits from 5 eruptions within a period of > 70 ka imply a recurrence interval of > 10 ka. However, before addressing the issue of eruption recurrence time, an estimate of the mass injection rate of mafic magma M˙in has to be made. Mafic magma can be injected in the chamber either episodically, as in the case of the nearby Santorini caldera21,22, or through the steady influx of melt. Seismological observations at Kolumbo tend to favour the latter possibility, since precise relative locations of microearthquakes cluster below the magma chamber at depths between 8–15 km23,24,25. This seismicity has been recorded at Kolumbo during different time periods indicating that it is not a transient feature, but rather represents the response of brittle rocks to the steady migration of fluids in the magma chamber.

Degruyter and Huber26 have formulated a thermomechanical model for the eruption frequency of silicic magma chambers that reside in the upper crust and have also suggested scaling relationships that describe the long-term behaviour of such chambers. One of these relationships connects the number N of observed eruptions with the properties of the magma chamber and those of the upper crust such that

N=(−4πb3σmlmΔp)R3+(4πb2ηκσmlm)R+(3b1ηM˙in)(4πηκσmlm)R
(1)
where b1=2.4, b2=3.5, b3=2.5 are scaling constants, σmlm is the density of mafic melt, η is the viscosity of the crust, κ is the thermal diffusivity of the crust and the remaining parameters are the same as previously. This equation can be solved numerically for M˙in (taking N=5) and then it is possible to calculate the recharge time needed to fill a magma chamber of radius R with a percentage φ of mafic magma. In order to check how variations in R, η, Δp and φ affect the calculated values of M˙in and recharge time, a total of 40,000 Monte Carlo simulations were performed where each of these parameters was varied randomly and simultaneously within a specific range (for details see section “Methods”). During all calculations parameters σmlm and κ were assumed as constant and their values can be found in Table 1. Based on these simulations the mean value of the mass injection rate is equal to 5.94 kg/s with a standard error of ± 0.01 kg/s, while in ∼ 93% of the simulations (i.e, 37,587 times) the calculated value of M˙in was smaller than 10 kg/s.

The scatter plot in Fig. 6 shows the variation of recharge time as a function of the chamber radius and the percentage of mafic magma. It can be seen that longer recharge times are needed for larger radius chambers and for larger percentages of mafic magma within the chamber. For a chamber size that has a radius between 1,400–1,500 m, the average time needed for injecting 1%, 5%, 10%, 15% of mafic magma is about 1.4, 5.1, 11.3 and 13.7 ka respectively. Considering that less than 400 years have elapsed since the last eruption and even requiring the minimum percentage (1%) of mafic magma to be injected in the chamber, more than 700 years are needed before another eruption can occur. It is interesting to note that the recharge time for 10–15% of mafic magma to be injected in the chamber, is similar to the recurrence interval of more than 10 ka proposed by Hübscher et al.15. These results also suggest that an eruption in the next few years is possible only if the chamber radius is smaller than 800 m. Such a chamber size is probably unrealistic for Kolumbo, since it would mean that its volume is equal to or smaller than the DRE volume of the 1650 AD eruption.

Eruption triggering mechanism
Another question that is related to the long-term behaviour of Kolumbo’s magma chamber has to do with the triggering mechanism of its eruptions. In their model, Degruyter and Huber26 defined three timescales that can help classify a magma chamber according to its eruption triggering mechanism and these are

τin=4π3ρR3M˙in
(2)
τcool=R2κ
(3)
τrelax=ηΔp
(4)
These timescales are used to form the dimensionless ratios θ1=τcool/τin and θ2=τrelax/τin that function as proxies for the heat budget of the chamber (i.e, heat loss/supply) and the balance between viscous relaxation of the crust and mass injection rate respectively. Based on these timescales, four eruption triggering regimes can be identified26: (i) triggering by second boiling when τcool<τrelax and θ1< 1, (ii) no eruptions when τcool>τrelax and θ1< 1, (iii) triggering by buoyancy when θ2< 1 and θ1> 1, (iv) triggering by mass injection when θ2> 1 and θ1>1.

It is possible to use the randomised quantities (M˙in, R, η, Δp) calculated in the previous section in order to repeat the Monte Carlo simulations for the three timescales as well as θ1 and θ2. The simulated values of θ1 and θ2 can then be plotted in a diagram similar to the one used by Degruyter and Huber, where the fields of the four different eruption triggering regimes can be clearly delineated. Figure 7 shows such diagrams in which the simulated values are plotted also as a function of the randomised quantities. The plotted points define trajectories that initially are parallel and very close to the border between regimes (i) and (iv), while under certain conditions (R>1,200 m, Δp>25 MPa and η<1020 Pa s) they may shift completely inside the field of regime (iv). The chamber radius and the viscosity of the crust around it likely satisfy the two of these conditions, at the same time however, a magma chamber with R>1,200 m will probably require smaller rather than larger overpressure as implied also by the simulations of the 1650 AD eruption discussed previously. Hence, Kolumbo’s magma chamber probably lies within the field of regime (i) but quite close to the border with regime (iv). Such a hybrid chamber behaviour can be explained by considering that prior to an eruption the pressure in the chamber increases due to exsolution of volatiles from the mafic magma as it cools and crystallises. This by itself cannot result to an eruption, since the heating of the larger silicic layer will cause resorption of the gas and dissolution of its crystals which will tend to decrease the pressure27. A small but steady influx of mafic melt is therefore necessary in order to keep the pressure in the chamber constantly rising.

These processes are also relevant to the way and to the degree that the two types of magma are mixed. The erupted products from the K5 (1650 AD) and K2 layer do not display any evidence of extensive mixing, but the mafic enclaves support magma mingling without any chemical hybridisation12,17. This seems to contradict the suggestion of steady influx of mafic melt in the chamber, since in this case greater mixing would be expected that would result in hybrid erupted products. However, large-scale mixing between the two magmas can be suppressed if the mafic magma maintains low viscosity, or its cooling rate is sufficiently small28. As the quantity of the mafic magma increases with time its cooling rate should become smaller and bubbles should start rising, forming a bubbly layer at the interface with the silicic magma28,29. Mafic enclaves can then be formed when this boundary layer becomes less dense, resulting in a Rayleigh-Taylor instability that would allow the bubbles to create vertical plumes within the layer of silicic magma9,28,29.

Conclusions
Submarine volcanism can be a source of significant hazards for maritime traffic and for nearby islands as it can generate powerful underwater explosions, floating pumice rafts, tsunami and pyroclastic flows. Kolumbo submarine volcano lies at the center of the southern Aegean and is surrounded by inhabited islands whose population increases significantly during the summer months. It is therefore of particular importance for volcanic risk assessment to investigate its potential for future eruptions and make inferences about their duration and erupted volume. This study combined constraints from multi-disciplinary observations (seismological, petrological, geochemical) in order to model the evolution of Kolumbo’s magma chamber during its last eruption in 1650 AD, also with the aim of understanding its long-term eruption behaviour. The main conclusions of this study are as follows:

Simulations of the evolution of Kolumbo’s magma chamber during the 1650 AD eruption were performed by using a chamber model containing silicic magma that is underlain by a layer of mafic magma. Results showed that the conduit radius and the mass fraction of volatiles have the most significant effect on the eruption duration, while the eruption rate is also influenced by the initial overpressure in the chamber. On the other hand, the total volume erupted depends not only on the initial overpressure and mass fraction of volatiles of the silicic magma, but also on the quantity of mafic magma residing inside the chamber. Using as constraints historical and geological observations it is possible to conclude that the 1650 AD eruption likely involved an initial overpressure of about 10 MPa, a conduit radius of 40–30 m, and mafic magma that occupied up to 5% of the chamber volume.

For a chamber radius consistent with the tomographic results at Kolumbo the average recharge time varies from 1.4 to 13.7 ka for mafic magma that occupies 1–15% of the chamber volume. This means that an eruption at Kolumbo in the foreseeable future is not likely, unless the magma chamber is much smaller (R<800 m), in which case the recharge time is in the order of a few hundred years. However, such a scenario comes into conflict with the small number of observed eruption cycles at Kolumbo (N=5) and the DRE volume of the deposits of the 1650 AD eruption (∼2 km3) that would be larger than the volume of the chamber itself.

Monte Carlo simulations of the ratios that indicate the balance between heat loss versus heat supply and viscous versus elastic behavior of the crust, classify Kolumbo’s magma chamber to a regime where pressure inside the chamber increases by a combination of volatile exsolution from the mafic magma and by a small but steady influx of mafic melt.

Although the results of this study suggest that the probability of an eruption at Kolumbo in the near future is rather low, there are still potential hazards related to Kolumbo’s intense hydrothermal activity. The most important of these hazards is the constant degassing of CO2 and its accumulation near the bathymetric low defining Kolumbo’s crater30,31. The progressive buildup of CO2 concentration in the seawater increases the chances of an episodic overturn that would result in the release of large quantities of gas in the surface, potentially suffocating the nearby islands. It is therefore prudent to closely monitor Kolumbo’s activity and study further its hydrothermal system in order to fully understand and mitigate the risk posed by this submarine volcano.

Methods
Model equations
The first equation describes the rate of change of pressure in the magma chamber as a response to the eruption output, as well as the heat transfer between the two magma types27

dΔpdt=1f(−Qρs+WmdTmdt+WsdTsdt)
(5)
where Δp is the chamber overpressure defined as the difference between chamber pressure and lithostatic pressure, Q is the mass eruption rate, ρs is the density of the silicic magma, Wm and Ws are quantities that describe the rate of change of volume with temperature of mafic magma (Tm) and temperature of silicic magma (Ts) respectively. The quantity f represents the effective chamber volume divided by the effective compressibility for each magma type (βs, βm) such that f=fm+fs+fw, while fw is equal to V/βw where V is the chamber volume and βw is the bulk modulus of the rock surrounding the chamber (see Woods and Huppert27 for equations describing Wm,Ws,fm,fs).

The magma chamber is connected to the surface with a conduit of radius r which here is represented as cylindrical rather than a rectangular fracture (cf. Fig. 3). This geometry avoids including in the model extra parameters, such as fracture width and aperture, that are poorly known. Since the focus of this work is not the phenomena that took place near the erupting vent, a simple expression for the eruption mass flow rate Q is utilized that is given by32

Q=ρsSA2ΔpμsH
(6)
where S is the shape factor of the conduit (∼ 0.1), A (=πr2) is the cross-sectional area of the conduit, and μs is the viscosity of the silicic magma that is considered a constant. The second equation that completes the model description represents the mass decrease rate of the silicic magma during the eruption as

dMsdt=−Q
(7)
Equations (5)–(7) form a system of ordinary differential equations with respect to time that can be solved to understand the behaviour of Kolumbo’s magma chamber during the 1650 AD eruption, as well as to draw conclusions about the duration and volume of future eruptions. The system of ordinary differential equations was numerically integrated at a time step of 1 minute using Matlab’s ode15s function which is a variable order solver suitable for stiff systems33.

Magma density calculation
The bulk density of both the mafic and the silicic magma can be calculated by considering them as mixtures of melt, crystals and volatiles in which case the density is34

ρm,s=(nm,sρg+1−nm,sσm,s)−1
(8)
where nm,s is the fraction of exsolved volatiles in each magma type, ρg is the density of H2O vapor obeying the perfect gas law, and σm,s is the bulk density of melt and its crystals. The latter quantity can be further calculated by the following expression34

σm,s=(xm,sσc(m,s)+1−xm,sσml(m,s))−1
(9)
where xm,s is the mass fraction of crystals in the magma, σc is the density of the crystals, and σml is the density of the melt. In the model simulations the mafic magma contains no crystals, hence xm= 0.

Heat transfer equations
The temperature of mafic magma is decreasing as heat is transferred to the silicic magma and the rate of change occurs according to the relation27

dTmdt=−G
(10)
where G represents the cooling rate of the mafic magma. On the contrary, the temperature of the silicic magma is increasing as it receives more heat and the rate of change of its temperature is given by

Ms(Cps+LΓs)dTsdt=(Cpm+LΓm)GMm
(11)
where Ms and Mm are the masses of silicic and mafic magma, Cps and Cpm are the specific heat for each magma type, L is latent heat of crystallisation, Γs and Γm are the crystallisation rates per degree of cooling for the two magma types.

Monte Carlo simulations
Randomised values of a quantity X can be calculated by the repeated use of the following equation

Xr=Xmin+(Xmax−Xmin)×rand
(12)
where Xr is the randomised value, Xmax and Xmin are the maximum and minimum values of X considered, while rand is a random number created by using Matlab’s random number generator. For the radius R of the magma chamber the chosen range was 200–1500 m, for the overpressure Δp it was 10–40 MPa, and for the viscosity of the crust η this was 1019–1022 Pa s. The percentage of mafic melt φ followed the range of 0.01–0.15 (1–15%).

Data availability
No datasets were analysed during the current study.