The waters along the world’s coasts and islands are incredibly important to human activities, yet they are not always well mapped. Coastal waters are often turbulent and murky, as the sand, mud, and sediment on the bottom is constantly in motion. Unless there are regularly dredged channels, it can be difficult and dangerous for ships to travel in shallow water. Making accurate and up-to-date depth charts is time-consuming and expensive, and doing so on a global scale is a monumental task.

By combining satellite measurements with ship-based sonar data, a team of researchers is now working to fill the gaps in our seafloor maps. They are using data from NASA’s Ice, Cloud, and land Elevation Satellite 2 (ICESat-2) to accurately measure the depths (bathymetry) of shallow coastal waters, where surveying ships have historically been unable to travel due to safety, expense, or remoteness.

The images above show Velasco Reef in the Republic of Palau. The left, natural-color image of the South Pacific reef was acquired by Landsat 8 in 2020; the right image is a digital elevation model created with ICESat-2 data. The map was developed as part of a demonstration study led by remote sensing scientists Lori Magruder of the University of Texas at Austin and Chris Parrish of Oregon State University. They partnered with the Coral Reef Research Foundation in Palau to fuse existing sonar data with their ICESat-2 dataset.

Mapping shallow, nearshore areas can be slow and potentially dangerous. Conventional field methods may involve a surveyor standing in shallow water, taking measurements at specific intervals, while at the mercy of waves and currents. Meanwhile, boat-based sonar surveys are inefficient in shallow waters and subject to the dangers of waves, rocks, and reefs. In addition, the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) has established Navigable Area Limit Lines (NALL), which define the shoreward limit of their boat-based surveys. The NALL is set at water depths of 3.5 meters (11 feet), and NOAA advises caution to captains maneuvering in shallow areas within the NALL because they are not often mapped, if at all. Sometimes the NALL limit can extend significant distances from shore.

These challenges result in many nearshore coastal waters being largely unmapped. The area is nicknamed “the white ribbon” because it appears as white space hugging coasts, shoals, and atolls on bathymetric maps. It essentially represents no data.

“The near-coastal area from 0 to 10 meters in depth is notoriously hard to map because a lot of the acoustic sensors that are used in bathymetry do not capture the shallower depths accurately,” said Magruder. “ Near-shore measurements provide a window into the coastal dynamics and processes that are really important.”


2020

The maps above show the NALL regions around Velasco Reef and the current water depths as measured by Magruder and Parrish’s team. This use of ICESat-2 data could be a game-changer.

The satellite’s main instrument is the ATLAS altimeter, which sends 10,000 laser pulses per second toward Earth’s surface and detects the photons that return in order to determine the height of landmasses and features on it (such as ice sheets, forests, and glaciers). It turns out that ICESat-2’s laser pulses can also penetrate the water column in shallow areas and return measurements from the seafloor.

The main mission of ICESat-2 is to map sea ice thickness and ice sheet elevation, as well as the height and density of temperate and tropical forests. Scientists and engineers thought it might be possible to measure ocean bathymetry, but they were not sure until Adrian Borsa, a geodesist at the University of California, San Diego, noticed in 2018 that ICESAT-2 data was picking up seafloor signals around Bikini Atoll in the South Pacific.

This finding provoked Parrish and Magruder to make a concentrated effort to use the satellite for near-shore mapping. Because it can observe across the entire globe, ICESat-2 provides broader spatial coverage than sonar-mapping ships. The satellite also collects data from the same location every 91 days, allowing for repeat mapping of areas that previously took great effort to map even once.

Beyond Velasco Reef, researchers are using the novel dataset to map near-shore habitats off of Western Australia and around the Gilbert Islands, French Polynesia, Turks and Caicos, and the Bahamas. The methods are even being used to map the shores of Lake Tahoe, California. With a complete and continuous look at near-shore bathymetry, researchers can aid efforts to monitor endangered coral reefs and coastal mangroves, sediment transport after disaster events, carbon storage capacity, water clarity, invasive species, and several other aspects of coastal dynamics.

Looking out the window of the International Space Station, astronauts often take the time to admire and photograph tropical islands and coral reefs. From an altitude of 400 km and with only a digital camera as a tool, it seems impossible to make detailed measurements of the depth of underwater features. However, a new technique developed by NOAA scientists has done just that—plotted the depths of lagoon features at Pearl and Hermes Reef, northwest Hawaii, using digital astronaut photography from the International Space Station (ISS).

Measuring water depth is an important step in mapping coral reef environments. Even though digital cameras are designed to visually approximate film photographs, the information they collect is similar to the bands of different wavelengths of light collected by multispectral instruments on satellites. NOAA scientists developed an algorithm that could estimate bathymetry from the blue and green bands in IKONOS satellite data. After calibrating the astronaut photography to the signal in the IKONOS data, the same algorithm could be successfully used with the blue and green channels in the astronaut photography. An accuracy assessment of the bathymetry map shows good correspondence between reference data, IKONOS, and ISS data.

Analysis of the Pearl and Hermes imagery was completed by Rick Stumpf and Kris Holderied at the NOAA National Ocean Service. NOAA NOS’s most recent coral reef mapping activities have focused on producing benthic habitat maps of the Northwest Hawaiian Islands for the Office of National Marine Sanctuaries. NOAA has primary responsibility for mapping activities in U.S.-Flag waters under the U.S. Coral Reef Task Force’s Mapping Implementation Plan. Partnership with Julie Robinson, Earth Observations Laboratory (Lockheed Martin), Johnson Space Center, has been facilitated by NASA support for Coral Reef Remote Sensing projects and collaborations.

Ningaloo Reef, along the shore of Western Australia, is Australia’s largest fringing coral reef. At roughly 300 kilometers (185 miles) long, it is also the world’s only large reef located so close to a landmass. At its point closest to the continent, the reef is just 100 meters (330 feet) from shore; at its farthest point, it is less than 7 kilometers (4.3 miles) away.

On July 25, 1999, NASA’s Landsat 7 satellite captured this photo-like image of Ningaloo Reef. Clear skies allow an unobstructed view of deep blue ocean water, and varied shades of brick red and beige in the coastal area of Western Australia. The reef is easily spotted in this image, thanks to the electric blue color of the water. The relatively shallow depths of these waters cause the lighter color. Along the shore, Point Cloates stretches seaward, surrounded by pale waters that overlie a reef.

Ningaloo Reef and the surrounding waters became Ningaloo Marine Park in 1987. The park is home to sharks, manta rays, dolphins, whales, more than 250 coral species, and numerous tropical fish species, including some of the world’s most colorful.

At 1.7 million square kilometers (660,000 square miles), the Greenland ice sheet is three times the size of Texas. On average, the ice is about 1.6 kilometers (1 mile) deep and contains enough water to raise global sea levels about 6 meters (20 feet) if it were all to melt.

Global sea level rise is one of the major environmental challenges of the 21st Century, and Greenland is central to the problem. That massive ice sheet touches the sea along more than 44,000 kilometers (27,000 miles) of jagged coastline. Hundreds of fjords, inlets, and bays bring ocean water right to the edge of the ice and, in some places, under it. This means the ice sheet is not just melting from warm air temperatures above; it is also likely being melted from water below.

For this reason, a team of scientists led by the Jet Propulsion Laboratory’s Josh Willis have launched the Oceans Melting Greenland, or OMG, field campaign. Started in the summer of 2015, OMG is a five-year airborne and ship-based mission to study the role of the oceans in melting Greenland’s ice. Researchers will examine the temperatures and other properties of North Atlantic waters along the coast, while also making measurements of the glaciers that reach the ocean. The OMG team is also building a profile of the seafloor around the island in order to better model how warm, deep ocean water might flow into those fjords and reach the glacier edges.

The map above shows some early results from OMG. In the late summer of 2015, the OMG team outfitted a fishing boat with sonar equipment to map the shape of the seafloor (the bathymetry) along the west coast of Greenland. The depth of the water is shown in shades of blue, with the deepest shades representing the deepest parts. Note the deep trench offshore from the Cornell and Ussing Braeer glaciers. Many of these canyons were cut into the seafloor during the advance and retreat of ice during the last Ice Age.

In this part of the North Atlantic, the warmest water is actually in the deepest parts of the sea, below waters that are cooled by cold Arctic air temperatures and winds. The OMG mapping effort will help the team figure out where deep Atlantic warm water might be able to reach the ice through the complicated currents and circulation around these canyons.

In March and April 2016, the OMG team began another phase of the campaign. Flying out of Iceland and Greenland, the team has been using a NASA G-III aircraft to survey coastal glaciers. The plane is equipped with the Glacier and Ice Surface Topography Interferometer (GLISTIN-A), a type of radar that can generate high-resolution, high-precision measurements of the height of coastal glaciers. The team will make such survey flights each spring through 2020 to track changes in glacier extent as evidence of growth or thinning in each melt season.

In the summer or fall of 2016, the third part of the research campaign will begin. The team will fly along both coasts and release 250 expendable sensors that can measure the temperature and salinity of coastal waters from the surface to 1000 meters (about 3,000 feet) in depth. The measurements of temperature properties will help complete the puzzle of how the ocean and ice are interacting, leading researchers to build better models of ice sheet changes and sea level rise.

Four months ago, with COVID-19 disrupting life across the globe, it seemed virtually unthinkable that a major NASA airborne science campaign would fly again anytime soon.

But today, that’s exactly what’s happening.

In August, NASA’s Aerosol Cloud Meteorology Interactions Over the Western Atlantic Experiment (ACTIVATE) eased into its second set of 2020 science flights out of NASA’s Langley Research Center in Hampton, Virginia. Barring any threats to the health or safety of the researchers or crew, flights will continue through the end of September.

Those flights are taking scientists over the western Atlantic Ocean to study how atmospheric aerosols and meteorological processes affect cloud properties. In addition, modelers will use data from these flights to better characterize how the clouds themselves, in turn, affect aerosol particle properties and the amount of time they spend in the atmosphere, as well as the meteorological environment. Coordinated flights between a King Air and an HU-25 Falcon allow researchers to fly above, below and through the clouds with a suite of instruments that can take measurements remotely, or from the air around the aircraft.


The HU-25 Falcon sits on the tarmac just ahead of a flight. Credits: NASA/David C. Bowman
“The data have been really good so far,” Armin Sorooshian, ACTIVATE principal investigator and an atmospheric scientist at the University of Arizona, said of the summer flights. “We’ve seen some interesting features, like smoke from the wildfires on the West Coast.”

That smoke can seed clouds over the Atlantic Ocean.

Sorooshian is leading the campaign remotely from his home in Tucson, Arizona, where he and his wife are juggling work and the care of two children — a two-year-old boy and a baby girl who was born in July.

He admits it’s “a little tough.” But in a world where these flights could have been scrubbed from the calendar completely, Sorooshian isn’t interested in dwelling on the negatives.

“They’re good problems,” he said.

Good Problems

The ACTIVATE team began the first of two planned 2020 flight campaigns in February. They completed most of those flights, but had to pull the plug a little early in mid-March when concerns about the spread of COVID-19 began to sweep across the U.S. At that point, the fate of the second set of flights, originally scheduled for May and June, was — pardon the pun — very much up in the air.

As the COVID situation evolved, though, and as Langley leadership began to admit a limited number of research projects back on center with stringent safety protocols in place, it became clear there might be a glimmer of hope for ACTIVATE.

ACTIVATE is uniquely positioned among other current NASA airborne science missions because it’s based out of a NASA center, and the flight crew and many members of the science team are also based out of that center. John Hair, ACTIVATE project scientist with Langley’s Science Directorate, knew that from a purely logistical perspective, the mission could return to flight without the need for anyone to travel in from out of town.

“We had an opportunity because ACTIVATE has a relatively small crew that can operate the instruments in the aircraft, and do that, we felt, safely — albeit with some changes to the initial plans we set out,” he said.

Besides obvious stuff such as wearing masks and being mindful of social distancing, those changes include conducting the various daily flight planning meetings and pre-flight briefings completely via video conference. Researchers are also doing real-time monitoring of flight data from their homes. For researchers who are flying or need to be on center, the project has found ways to streamline some processes.

“For example, people are learning how to do their calibrations at the end of the flight after the instruments are already warmed up,” said Hair. “And then it only takes an hour to do.”

Compare that to the three or four hours it can take a researcher to warm up and calibrate an instrument before a flight.


The King Air rolls out of the hangar before a science flight. Credits: NASA/David C. Bowman
The entire operation has taken a lot of careful planning and coordination between Langley’s Science Directorate, Research Services Directorate and Center Operations Directorate. Sheer determination has certainly played a role as well.

“We all signed up for supporting research as it comes in. ACTIVATE was in the middle of a major campaign and we wanted to get them back to flying as soon as we could,” said Taylor Thorson, ACTIVATE project pilot with Langley’s Research Services Directorate.

Sorooshian believes this experience could be instructive for the next round of flights, which are currently scheduled to kick off in February 2021 when COVID-19 could still be a significant concern.

It’s not just instructive from a safety perspective. Marine clouds are more scattered and difficult to forecast in the summer.

“Flying this summer also allows the team to hone the flight planning strategies, which can build upon heading into the next two years of flight campaigns,” he said.

For now, he and Hair are just happy to see a study they both care deeply about back in action.

“This is exciting that we’re out doing some flights,” said Hair. “People are excited to get the critical science data that we’re collecting on these flights.”

The ACTIVATE science team includes researchers from NASA, the National Institute of Aerospace, universities, Brookhaven National Laboratory, Pacific Northwest National Laboratory, the National Center for Atmospheric Research and the German Aerospace Center. The current flight campaign is the second of two in 2020, with two more to follow in 2021, and another two in 2022.

ACTIVATE is one of five new NASA Earth Venture campaigns originally scheduled to take to the field in 2020. Three of the five have been postponed due to COVID-19. To learn more about the other campaigns, visit: https://www.nasa.gov/feature/goddard/2019/nasa-embarks-on-us-cross-country-expeditions

AuthorEllen Gray
Posted onSeptember 22, 2020
TagsACTIVATE
An Active Arctic: Where Sea Ice Meets the Midnight Sun
The German icebreaker Polarstern lit up on every deck, acting as a beacon for researchers navigating the Arctic terrain. Credit: University of Maryland / Steven Fons
The German icebreaker Polarstern lit up on every deck, acting as a beacon for researchers navigating the Arctic terrain. Credit: University of Maryland / Steven Fons
By Emily Fischer, Goddard Space Flight Center

In the early 1900s, Ernest Shackleton attempted to travel across Antarctica, but as they neared the continent his ship became stuck in an pack of sea ice and was slowly crushed before it reached the landmass. Over 100 years later and on the opposite side of the globe in the Arctic, researchers in the massive, double-hulled icebreaker, Polarstern, are also stuck in a pack of sea ice – but this time on purpose. And this ship isn’t sinking any time soon.

Polarstern is the operational center for the Multidisciplinary drifting Observatory for the Study of Arctic Climate, or MOSAiC. The first expedition of its kind, MOSAiC is an international mission exploring the Arctic climate system year-round, with more than 100 scientists and crew members from 20 nations living aboard the research vessel.

Intentionally trapping itself in the sea ice, Polarstern drifts with the floe, which is a large pack of floating sea ice. Researchers set up “little cities” on the ice where they take measurements using delicate instruments. While it appears that the sea ice they walk on to reach these camps is stationary, everything is actually slowly drifting as wind and ocean currents push the gigantic slabs of ice.

Steven Fons (bottom row, second from the right) and his ice coring team after successfully drilling sea ice samples. Each core will be analyzed at the labs aboard Polarstern. Credit: University Center in Svalbard / Calle Schönning
Steven Fons (bottom row, second from the right) and his ice coring team after successfully drilling sea ice samples. Each core will be analyzed at the labs aboard Polarstern. Credit: University Center in Svalbard / Calle Schönning
MOSAiC is a multidisciplinary expedition, as researchers from a variety of fields – including marine biology, meteorology, and oceanography – collaboratively study Arctic changes.

“It’s more of a process study,” explained Steven Fons, a Ph.D. candidate at the University of Maryland and NASA’s Goddard Space Flight Center, who studied sea ice from March to May of this year. “The idea, then, is once everybody collects this data, we can compile everything and learn about the sea ice in the ocean, and the atmosphere and the ecology.”

Sea ice is an integral part of the Arctic climate system because it sits directly between the ocean and the atmosphere, moderating the exchange of heat and moisture. An important climate indicator, sea ice research identifies changes in other Arctic climate systems, including the ocean, atmosphere, ecology, and biogeochemical cycles. Basically, studying sea ice can give greater insight into how the entire Arctic is reacting to climate change.

Researchers haul their equipment to their field sites through snow blown by harsh winds. One researcher, a polar bear guard, carries a rifle on his back in case of an emergency. Credit: Alfred Wegener Institute / Delphin Rouché
Researchers haul their equipment to their field sites through snow blown by harsh winds. One researcher, a polar bear guard, carries a rifle on his back in case of an emergency. Credit: Alfred Wegener Institute / Delphin Rouché
For a small group of MOSAiC researchers, every Monday was a 14-hour workday spent at “Dark Sites,” named so because they are isolated from the bright lights of Polarstern. After traveling over a mile on snow machine, the team used hollow drills to remove cylindric cores from the sea ice floe. In the labs aboard Polarstern, these samples revealed the fascinating characteristics of sea ice.

“As ice forms, it will eject the salt away as it’s freezing,” said Fons. “The longer it stays around, the more salt essentially drains out of it.” Basically, high salt levels tell researchers that this particular ice formed in the most recent winter. This can reveal how the Arctic adjusts to higher temperatures, as the region is warming at a rate more than twice the global average.

In the Arctic, wind chill can reach frigid temperatures as low as minus 70 degrees Fahrenheit. Working in the cold without hand protection was impossible, so Fons wore thin gloves underneath his bulky mittens, which he removed when handling small objects. Even so, frequent warming breaks were necessary, which meant simple, one-minute tasks could take 10 times longer in Arctic conditions.

“Some of the really cold days, you can only last 30 seconds at a time taking off your big mittens,” he recounted. “You just have to put five zip ties on this cable, perfect. It should take one minute to do, but it would take 20 minutes because you have to keep warming your hands and [the zip ties] keep breaking in the cold.”

Native to Wisconsin, Fons is no stranger to subzero winters. Nonetheless, during this expedition he witnessed temperatures unlike anything he had ever experienced before. Icy winds bit into any exposed skin. His only relief: a thick, bushy beard and about ten layers of clothing.

Steven Fons bundles up in the subzero temperatures with a fur-lined hat, multiple face-coverings, and nine or ten layers underneath his protective jacket. Credit: University Center in Svalbard / Calle Schönning
Steven Fons bundles up in the subzero temperatures with a fur-lined hat, multiple face-coverings, and nine or ten layers underneath his protective jacket. Credit: University Center in Svalbard / Calle Schönning
In an ever-changing environment, researchers’ locations can be difficult to determine on the ice cover, which can literally shift beneath their feet. For MOSAiC, every measurement is paired with a GPS coordinate. However, the ice drifts, and so the latitude and longitude change every day. Instead, the immense icebreaker Polarstern is used as a point of reference, a sort of ground zero for field navigation.

“You’re given a position away from the ship, so a certain distance of x and y, and that will theoretically never change,” Fons explained. But even this system has its obstacles. “If the ice broke up and the ship moves a little bit, then you can lose your x-y positions, so it didn’t always work.”

Helicopters and planes accompany Polarstern, getting a birds-eye view of the stark white landscape. Flying high above the floe, planes take airborne measurements in a similar way to Operation IceBridge. Fons does research using data from NASA’s ICESat-2 – the satellite that surveys glaciers and sea ice around the globe – and he was lucky enough to validate some of the satellite’s measurements while researching with MOSAiC.

“On the ship, since we’re constantly drifting with the ice, we don’t exactly know where we’re going to be on any given day,” he said. “We got lucky that we happened to be drifting one day over a spot that ICESat-2 was going to fly over. We were able to jump on that opportunity and schedule a helicopter flight.”


Seasonal changes near the poles are unlike anywhere else on Earth. Summer and winter are really the only seasons these regions experience, characterized by a dramatic transition between complete darkness during winter days to total sunlight during the summer. Ten days after reaching Polarstern, Fons witnessed his first Arctic sunrise. As summer came, the Sun sailed over the horizon for longer and longer each day until it refused to set, resulting in the phenomenon of the “midnight sun.”

The Sun at midnight on a day when it never dipped below the horizon. The North Pole, referred to as the land of the midnight sun, experiences about five months of total darkness and about six months of never-ending sunlight. Credit: University of Maryland / Steven Fons
The Sun at midnight on a day when it never dipped below the horizon. The North Pole, referred to as the land of the midnight sun, experiences about five months of total darkness and about six months of never-ending sunlight. Credit: University of Maryland / Steven Fons
Ice dynamics, or the movement of ice slabs in the floe that changes the terrain, were a trademark of Fons’ three months on Polarstern. Sometimes, the researchers would wake up to massive leads, or ice fractures, blocking their usual routes. Other days, research tents would be buried in ice piles from leads that closed to form towering ridges. Sea ice dynamics had a wide appeal for study among MOSAiC teams. Below the floe, marine biologists and ecologists studied microorganisms. Within the ice itself, sea ice researchers examined crystallization patterns.

“With MOSAiC, what people are able to do is look at the ice at so many different scales and through many different lenses,” Fons summarized.

An ice lead converged to form a ridge of precariously piled slabs of ice. Credit: University of Maryland / Steven Fons
An ice lead converged to form a ridge of precariously piled slabs of ice. Credit: University of Maryland / Steven Fons
 

AuthorEllen Gray
Posted onJuly 24, 2020
TagsMOSAiC
Chasing Satellites with Jacques Cousteau
acques Cousteau and his team of expert divers were a key part of the success of the 1975 NASA-Cousteau Bathymetry Experiment. In this photo from left to right: Bernard Delemotte, Chief Diver; Henri Garcia; Jean-Jérome Carcopin, and Jacques Cousteau. Photo credit: NASA
Jacques Cousteau and his team of expert divers were a key part of the success of the 1975 NASA-Cousteau Bathymetry Experiment. In this photo from left to right: Bernard Delemotte, Chief Diver; Henri Garcia; Jean-Jérome Carcopin, and Jacques Cousteau. Photo credit: The Cousteau Society (preserved as large format photo at NASA’s Goddard Space Flight Center)
By Laura Rocchio, Goddard Space Flight Center

Leaving from Nassau on a Tuesday night in August 1975, Jacques Cousteau and his team set out on the Calypso for a three-week expedition designed to help NASA determine if the young Landsat satellite mission could measure the depth of shallow ocean waters.

For days, the Calypso played leapfrog with the Landsat 1 and 2 satellites in the waters between the Bahamas and Florida. Each night, it sailed 90 nautical miles to be in position for the morning overpass of the satellite.

Ultimately, research done on the trip determined that in clear waters, with a bright seafloor, depths up to 22 meters (72 feet) could be measured by Landsat.

The primary test site for the expedition was just west of the Berry Islands on the northern edge of the Great Bahama Bank. The location was chosen as the prime testing site because it gradually changed depth from one meter to deep ocean in a short north-south span (25 nautical miles). This natural-color Landsat 8 image acquired on March 23, 2019, shows where the northern Great Bahama Bank meets the deep ocean. Image credit: NASA/USGS Landsat 
The primary test site for the expedition was just west of the Berry Islands on the northern edge of the Great Bahama Bank. The location was chosen as the prime testing site because it gradually changed depth from one meter to deep ocean in a short north-south span (25 nautical miles). This natural-color Landsat 8 image acquired on March 23, 2019, shows where the northern Great Bahama Bank meets the deep ocean. Image credit: NASA/USGS Landsat
This revelation gave birth to the field of satellite-derived bathymetry and enabled charts in clear water areas around the world to be revised, helping sailing vessels and deep-drafted supertankers avoid running aground on hazardous shoals or seamounts.

“It was a tremendous example of how modern tools of scientists can be put together to get a better understanding of this globe we live on,” the Deputy NASA Administrator, George Low, said of the joint Cousteau-NASA expedition in a 1976 interview.

But it couldn’t have happened without the world’s most famous aquanaut, his team of expert divers, and the Calypso.

Astronauts and Aquanauts Together
The ocean’s vastness made Cousteau an early supporter of satellite remote sensing.

Cousteau, by then a decades-long oceanographer, was keenly aware that ocean monitoring from above would be necessary to understand the ocean as part of the interconnected Earth system and to raise the awareness requisite for protecting the sea. There was a growing recognition in the 1970s that helping the planet required understanding the planet.

“Everything that happens is demonstrating the need for space technology applied to the ocean,” Cousteau said during a 1976 interview at NASA Headquarters.

George Low, the Deputy NASA Administrator, himself a recreational diver, connected Jacques Cousteau with former Apollo 9 and Skylab astronaut Russell Schweickart. Schweickart was heading up NASA’s User Services division and both he and Cousteau were looking for ways to advance Earth science.

At the time, it was theorized that the new Landsat satellites might be useful for measuring shallow ocean waters. New deep-drafted supertankers were carrying crude oil around the globe, and to avoid environmental catastrophes it had become important to know where waters in shipping lanes were less than 65 feet (20 meters).

For this experiment, Landsat data was downlinked to NASA Goddard Space Flight Center in Greenbelt, Maryland where it was processed into depth contour data. This was uplinked to the Applications Technology Satellite-3 (ATS-3) and then sent via Very High Frequency (VHF) relay to a VHF receiver system that had been installed on the Calypso for an earlier 1974 experiment in the Gulf of Mexico. Image credit: NA
For this experiment, Landsat data was downlinked to NASA Goddard Space Flight Center in Greenbelt, Maryland where it was processed into depth contour data. This was uplinked to the Applications Technology Satellite-3 (ATS-3) and then sent via Very High Frequency (VHF) relay to a VHF receiver system that had been installed on the Calypso for an earlier 1974 experiment in the Gulf of Mexico. Image credit: NASA
To establish if Landsat could accurately measure ocean depth from space, simultaneous measurements from ships, divers and the satellite were needed.

Schweickart knew a coordinated bathymetry expedition was an essential step. He had honed his diving expertise while training for his Skylab mission in NASA’s water immersion facility and was enthusiastic about scuba work. Teaming with Cousteau was a natural fit.

Chasing Satellites
An elaborate experiment was designed to determine definitively if multispectral data from the Landsat satellites could be used to calculate water depth. The clear waters of the Bahamas and coastal Florida were selected as the test site.

The experiment design involved two research vessels, the Calypso and Johns Hopkins University Applied Physics Lab’s Beadonyan, being in position, or “on station,” when the Landsat 1 and 2 satellites went overhead on eight different days (four consecutive days on each of two weeks).

The overall concept was simple: the research ships would use their fathometers to measure water depth at the exact same time that the satellite flew overhead and then those measurements would be compared (the simultaneous measurements eliminated any environmental or atmospheric differences that could have complicated comparisons). But realizing that plan took extraordinary coordination.

A detail from the planning map used for the 1975 NASA-Cousteau Bathymetry Experiment showing the Berry Islands. The hatched lines show the location of Landsat scene edges. Click on image for full map. Image credit: NASA 
A detail from the planning map used for the 1975 NASA-Cousteau Bathymetry Experiment showing the Berry Islands. The hatched lines show the location of Landsat scene edges. Image credit: NASA
As the Landsat satellite flew overhead, Cousteau and his team of divers made a series of carefully timed measurements of water clarity, light transmission through the water column, and bottom reflectivity. This was done both near the Calypso and at two sites 60 meters from the Calypso using small motorized Zodiac rigid inflatable boats.

To make the light transmission measurements, two teams of divers had to use a submarine photometer to measure light at the water’s surface, one meter under the water and in 5-meter increments to the bottom (down to 20 meters).

The divers had to hold the photometer in a fixed position looking up and cycle through four different measurements. They also used specially filtered underwater cameras to measure bottom reflectivity (assisted by gray cards for reference). Everything was carefully timed. Schweickart and President Gerald Ford’s son Jack helped with these underwater measurements.

To make the precision measurements, the skill of these divers – including Cousteau’s chief diver, Bernard Delemotte – was essential.

“I was in charge of the divers,” Delemotte explained in a recent interview. “We were very convinced that we could do serious work together [with NASA].”

Before the satellite overpass, the Calypso and Beayondan were in position, anchored side-by-side, and ready to make all specified measurements.

“Two small Zodiacs left from the Calypso just before the satellite passage,” Delemotte recalls.

The Zodiacs stationed themselves 200 feet (60 meters) from the Calypso, and at the moment that the satellite was overhead someone on the Calypso would call to the divers through the portable VHF radio: “Go now!”

The divers would then start the series of prescribed measurements.

Using these measurements, scientists developed mathematical models describing the relationship between the satellite data and water depth, accounting for how far the light could travel through water, and how reflective the ocean floor was.

“Particular thanks” was given to Cousteau’s team of divers in the experiment’s final report “for their dedication and expertise in the underwater phases of the experiment, without which, measurements of key experimental parameters could not have been made.”

The diving prowess of Cousteau, Delemotte, and the Calypso crew added inextricably to the realm of satellite-derived bathymetry. Because of data collected during the NASA-Cousteau expedition, charts in clear water areas around the world were updated, making sea navigation safer. It was the precision measurements made by Delemotte and Cousteau’s team of divers that made bathymetry calculations for those chart updates possible.

AuthorEllen Gray
Posted onJuly 21, 2020
TagsLandsat
Operation IceBridge: Glaciers Aren’t Forever

by Emily Fischer

Flying a plane over Alaska’s vast landscape provides a birds-eye view of some incredible sights. Bears run across frigid streams, moose trample through mounds of snow, and golden eagles own the air above ice-capped mountains. Glaciers cut paths through these mountains, leaving lakes and rivers in their wake. These glaciers are especially interesting to scientists who want to learn more about climate change in a region that is changing more than any other.


Johns Hopkins Glacier lies beyond Johns Hopkins Fjord. Credits: University of Alaska Fairbanks/Christopher Larsen
According to Christopher Larsen, project manager of Operation IceBridge (OIB) Alaska, these glaciers are losing on the order of 75 billion tons of ice each year, which contribute to global sea level rise. Learning more about these mysterious, ancient ice formations could give scientists a better understanding about the impacts of global climate change in the Arctic.

Thousands of miles above the surface of these glaciers, satellites collect data on how these gargantuan slabs of ice are changing. Ice, Cloud and land Elevation Satellite-2 (ICESat-2) was launched in 2018, 11 years after its predecessor was decommissioned. In the decade in between, OIB bridged the gap, collecting data and exploring Alaskan glaciers with a whole new perspective.

Now, two years after ICESat-2 made its way into low-Earth orbit, OIB is finishing its final campaign. Having wrapped up its flight season last week, the team plans to do a final set of flights in August. And Larsen, a research professor at the University of Alaska Fairbanks, will finish up his last of eleven summers managing OIB Alaska.


A view from the wing of the Cessna TU206G while mapping a potential landslide in the Barry Arm and approaching the Barry Glacier. Credits: University of Alaska Fairbanks/John W. Holt
Instead of satellites, his team collects data using instruments aboard two small, single-engine aircraft. They shoot a laser from the bottom of each plane that hits the glacier’s surface and bounces back up. By calculating the amount of time it takes the laser pulses to return to the instruments, Larsen and his team can then estimate the surface elevation of the glacier at specific coordinates.

He said that most science projects at the university only last three years, but IceBridge Alaska has studied glaciers for over a decade.

“I’ve been involved in almost all of the flight campaigns myself,” Larsen said. “It’s really wonderful to have something that’s dedicated to monitoring and observing glaciers over a longer time period.”

Alaskan glaciers are temperate, meaning the ice is at or near melting point, and they melt and refreeze as they adjust to changes in the climate to maintain a balance between ice accumulation and melting. As the Arctic is warming at twice the global average,  ice loss is accelerating, contributing to global sea level rise.

One problem with studying temperate glaciers is measuring depth. Radar doesn’t permeate water well, so determining ice thickness can be a challenge. To resolve this problem, the team must use a different frequency range, which isn’t always 100% effective. Despite this challenge, Larsen and his team have determined that some of the thickest ice in Alaska is on the order of 4,900 feet (1500 meters) and located in the Bagley Ice Valley. If all of that ice were to melt, the whole valley could turn into a lake or fjord.

But predictions of ice melt are hard to make because of the individual nature of glaciers. Like snowflakes, all are unique and respond differently to changes in the environment. “What we’ve found in general is that there’s a lot of variation from glacier to glacier, and it’s hard to pin that to any [common] characteristic of a glacier,” Larsen summarized.

And these glaciers have lost a lot of ice.


Terminus of the Ellsworth Glacier, showing large ice bergs breaking off from the glacier as it retreats. Credits: University of Alaska Fairbanks/Christopher Larsen
Not only are scientific barriers a challenge – physical limitations affect the flight campaign as well. For instance, the weather plays a huge role in the operation’s success. Larsen and his team check the weather constantly and plan their flights a day or two in advance based on wind and storm patterns. Weather is the true determinant of where and when they can fly. While satellites collect data at set intervals, planes that rely on clear and calm skies don’t always have this luxury.

The greatest challenge, according to Larsen, is collecting measurements of the same glaciers at consistent intervals. “And that’s driven mainly because you’re operating a light aircraft in large mountains with big weather systems,” he explained.

Nevertheless, the IceBridge Alaska campaign has been able to successfully collect data by running a relatively small campaign with a flexible team. Their pilots sometimes have to change survey paths mid-flight due to the weather, and research teams work proactively to prioritize safety and efficiency. Adding a new plane this summer has boosted productivity exponentially.

Besides their successful data collection on Alaskan glaciers, the IceBridge team has combined scientific processes with personal observations, some of which have been peculiar, to say the least.

Case in point: While flying over Yakutat Glacier, on the Gulf of Alaska’s coast, Larsen was surprised to see that the glacier was almost entirely concealed by a dark mass. When the plane flew closer, he realized that the ice was actually covered by many fuzzy moss balls, fondly nicknamed “glacier mice” by researchers. These tumbleweeds of Alaskan glaciers are still a mystery to scientists who track their movements. Larsen has seen Yakutat Glacier break apart into large icebergs and retreat significantly over the past few years. Most of the moss balls have ended up in Harlequin Lake.


Fuzzy moss balls, nicknamed glacier mice, gather in piles on Yakutat Glacier. Scientists have observed these moss balls change position over time, but the nature behind this movement is still largely a mystery. Credits: University of Alaska Fairbanks/Christopher Larsen
Authorsreiny
Posted onJuly 8, 2020
TagsIceBridge
Lasers and Bubbles: Solving the Arctic’s Methane Puzzle

Phil Hanke (left) and Katey Walter Anthony determine if an Alaskan lake contains methane by igniting the gas flux. Credits: University of Alaska Fairbanks/Nicholas Hasson
by Emily Fischer

Trudging through snow up to their thighs, researchers Nicholas Hasson and Phil Hanke pull 200 pounds of equipment through boreal terrain near Fairbanks, Alaska. Once they reach their destination – a frozen, collapsing lake — they drill through two feet of ice to access frigid water containing copious amounts of methane.

Hasson lies flat on his stomach and reaches both of his arms into the subzero water. The stench of 40,000-year-old rotting vegetation floats up from the permafrost. He attempts to open the valve on a piece of equipment underneath the water’s surface using his fingers, but his thick protective gloves (water would instantly freeze onto his arms, otherwise) make simple tasks challenging. Finally, he manages to collect his sample, close the valve, and put a stopper in the vial, which is now full of methane gas.

The researchers then trek back to their lab to analyze these samples as part of ongoing field research to fill in a key knowledge gap in climate science: What happens to thawing permafrost in winter?

Hasson, a student researcher with NASA’s Arctic Boreal Vulnerability Experiment, or ABoVE, has been studying Alaskan lakes for three years. His team at the University of Alaska Fairbanks researches how thawing permafrost in Arctic regions contributes to climate change.

Permafrost is ground in mainly polar regions that stays frozen throughout the year, for multiple years. Almost 25% of the Northern Hemisphere contains permafrost. Partially decayed plant matter is trapped within the permafrost, creating a sort of “dirty, dusty, carbon-rich” layer of icy soil, as Hasson described.

Permafrost, he continued in analogy, is like a giant carbon freezer that has been storing organic material for tens of thousands of years. Over the past several decades, as climate change warmed the region, it’s as if someone has left the door open and all the contents of the freezer are thawing. As permafrost thaws, trapped plant matter is broken down by microbes; as a result,  carbon dioxide and methane—a greenhouse gas 25 times more potent than the former—are released into the atmosphere.

Thawing permafrost can also collapse, creating depressions that fill with rain and melting snow to form thermokarst lakes, accelerating permafrost thaw and the subsequent release of greenhouse gases.


Methane bubbles freeze in the ice as they leak from thawing permafrost beneath Alaskan lakes. These bubbles are measured by researchers to determine the amount of methane released. Credits: University of Alaska Fairbanks/Nicholas Hasso
As the methane bubbles to the surface of lakes in the winter, it freezes in the ice, forming pockets of varying sizes and shapes. These pockets create unique patterns on top of the frozen lakes. In the summer, visitors can watch little bubbles burst at the water’s surface like a hot spring, releasing methane into the atmosphere. This scene illustrates how much the environment here has changed in a region warming twice as fast as the rest of the planet. Only a few decades ago, Arctic winters were colder, many of these lakes didn’t exist and the permafrost was rock solid.

How permafrost behaves in winter has largely been a mystery, but basic physics tells us there’s a lot to learn about its behavior during those darker months. For instance, heat travels slowly through water, so the water in Alaskan lakes holds heat and thaws permafrost partway into the cold season. It’s like lying on the beach in the sun and then walking into an air-conditioned building: your skin still feels warm for a while. Scientists can’t get the whole picture on methane emissions unless they take consistent measurements year-round.


Methane bubbles freeze in the ice as they leak from thawing permafrost beneath Alaskan lakes. Credits: University of Alaska Fairbanks/Nicholas Hasson
Because planes can only take airborne methane measurements in the summer when there isn’t much snow coverage and because field researchers don’t usually take mid-winter measurements, there is an eight-month gap in the data set – eight months that could completely change how scientists model methane emissions, which have nearly tripled in the past 200 years. These models are crucial in understanding methane’s role in climate change. And that’s why Hasson and his colleagues are in the middle of the Alaskan wilderness: to study methane emissions year-round and provide data for developing climate models.

Hasson and Finke’s university lab will age the gas samples they collect in the field using carbon isotopes to better understand how ancient carbon is being transported into the atmosphere. Even now, in the summertime when airborne measurements are possible, the field team still collects samples at thermokarst lakes and takes them to the lab for analysis.

Hasson said a combination of many different types of measurements and methods is vital to their success. The ABoVE team uses absorption spectrometry to measure methane emissions by shooting lasers through large chambers placed in the water. They also use an insulated sled nicknamed “the coffin” to protect their delicate equipment from the cold while traveling in the field. The team even carries around a giant magnet that can image the ground layers below them, mapping thawing regions of the permafrost. All these methods are the pieces to understanding the puzzle of Arctic permafrost.

Field researchers make observations and collect data so that others can put the pieces in computer models and see the greater picture. “I don’t actually make the predictions,” Hasson said. “I’m just gathering the evidence so that people can put the puzzle together and try to figure out what’s going to happen.”


ABoVE field researchers must navigate rough boreal terrain on foot or by dog sled to access remote permafrost lakes, pulling 200 pounds of scientific equipment behind them. Credits: University of Alaska Fairbanks/Nicholas Hasson
But “just” gathering the evidence underestimates the task at hand. Even in the cold, Hasson must walk hours to each remote Alaskan lake, pulling his equipment along, following densely forested trails that are too narrow for snow machines.

To save time in a season when daylight is limited and the cold unbearable, Hasson and Hanke, an ABoVE research technician, had the idea to use Hanke’s sled dogs for field travel. The dogs are used to running through winding trails and rough terrain while pulling heavy cargo. And this way, the two researchers get a much-needed break from hauling equipment.

 


ABoVE field researchers must navigate rough boreal terrain on foot or by dog sled to access remote permafrost lakes, pulling 200 pounds of scientific equipment behind them. Credit: University of Alaska Fairbanks/Nicholas Hasson
“What’s unique is that [dog mushing’s] original intent was to supply healthcare to remote places in Alaska,” Hasson said. “And now, a century later, we’re staying true to that philosophy and collecting long-term data to know the health of our ecosystems.”


Phil Hanke (left) and Nicholas Hasson measure methane seeps from a permafrost lake near Fairbanks, Alaska, using equipment hauled on an insulated sled, nicknamed “the coffin.” Credits: University of Alaska Fairbanks/Nicholas Hasson
Authorsreiny
Posted onJune 18, 2020
TagsABoVE
Prepping for a High Altitude Flight
NASA's high-altitude ER-2 aircraft was part of the IMPACTS field mission to study snow in January and February, 2020. Credit: NASA/Katie Stern
NASA’s high-altitude ER-2 aircraft was part of the IMPACTS field mission to study snow in January and February, 2020. Credit: NASA/Katie Stern
By Katie Stern, IMPACTS’ Deputy Project Manager / HUNTER ARMY AIRFIELD, SAVANNAH, GEORGIA/

“Get in there and check it out!”

I was encouraged by “Corky” Cortes from the NASA ER-2 Life Support Team to see how the pilots prepare for their flight. This was my first NASA field campaign with the ER-2, a high altitude aircraft requiring a Life Support Team to help maintain the health and safety of the pilots. This aircraft is highly specialized and has been modified by NASA for conducting airborne science research.

NASA ground crew preparing the ER-2 for a science flight at Hunter Army Airfield in Savannah, Georgia. There are seven scientific instruments located on the aircraft for the IMPACTS project and they are used to study snowstorms. Credit: NASA/Katie Stern
NASA ground crew preparing the ER-2 for a science flight at Hunter Army Airfield in Savannah, Georgia. There are seven scientific instruments located on the aircraft for the IMPACTS project, used to study snowstorms. Credit: NASA/Katie Stern
As the Deputy Project Manager for the NASA IMPACTS project (Investigation of Microphysics and Precipitation for Atlantic Coast-Threatening Snowstorms), I spent January and February at Hunter Army Airfield in Savannah, Georgia, managing the deployment site for the ER-2 and the mission scientists. Our project is specifically focused on studying snowbands across the Eastern seaboard. The ER-2 plays a critical role in capturing remote sensing data to better predict the severity of storms.

Deputy Project Managers Fran Becker and Katie Stern awaiting the ER-2 science flight. Cross winds were mild and the ER-2 was able to take off. Credit: NASA
Deputy Project Managers Fran Becker and Katie Stern awaiting the ER-2 science flight. Cross winds were mild and the ER-2 was able to take off. Credit: NASA
As a new member to the team, I was unfamiliar with what the Life Support crew and pilot needed to do before each flight. Determined to find out, I peered into the tiny office and saw Joey Barr from Life Support setting up the dressing area for pilot Cory Bartholomew. The full pressure suit was completely unzipped, its green lining visible. It was laid out on the floor to make the dressing process easier. Shiny black boots with metal stirrups used for the ejection seat were placed neatly on both sides of the vinyl chair. Behind Cory were two bright yellow gloves and a space helmet carefully placed on a donut shaped pillow. Everything was ready to go. All we needed was the pilot.

Prior to every flight, the ER-2 Life Support team lays out all of the equipment to aid in an easier suiting up process. The suits weigh between 35-40 pounds and every pilot wears long underwear inside the suit. It is important to make sure that the pilot does not overheat during the suiting process so the pilots are usually assisted by a Life Support crew member. Credit: NASA/Katie Stern
Prior to every flight, the ER-2 Life Support team lays out all of the equipment to aid in an easier suiting up process. The suits weigh between 35-40 pounds and every pilot wears long underwear inside the suit. It is important to make sure that the pilot does not overheat during the suiting process so the pilots are usually assisted by a Life Support crew member. Credit: NASA/Katie Stern
The actual suiting-up process looked a bit cumbersome. I could see why it would be easy to overheat if you tried dressing yourself. One foot, after another, Cory stepped into the matte yellow and green suit and then poked his head through a metal collar, which was used to secure his space helmet.

The two men worked silently, adjusting the suit, putting on the torso harness, tightening straps, and going over the checklist in their heads. They’ve both been through this routine hundreds of times, but for me it was fascinating to see the thought and care going into each movement.

ER-2 Pilot Cory Bartholomew being helped into his full pressure suit by Joey Barr from the Life Support Team. Credit: NASA/Katie Stern
ER-2 Pilot Cory Bartholomew being helped into his full pressure suit by Joey Barr from the Life Support Team. Credit: NASA/Katie Stern
After a few adjustments to the velcro reading glasses that went inside the helmet, Cory snapped the visor shut, and Joey put on his headset to begin the suit pressure checks. A small yellow box filled with liquid oxygen was then connected to the front of the suit with a hose. These pressurized suits along with the liquid oxygen (LOX) allow pilots to fly at an altitude of 65,000 feet, so high the pilots can see the curvature of the Earth.

Joey Barr making sure that Cory Bartholomew is happy with his glasses. Once the helmet is shut, the pilot will not open the visor again until after landing. Credit: NASA/Katie Stern
Joey Barr making sure that Cory Bartholomew is happy with his glasses. Once the helmet is shut, the pilot will not open the visor again until after landing. Credit: NASA/Katie Stern
A few moments later the suit began to inflate and Cory motioned for me to tap on his knee to feel the outward force from the pressure check. A few more checks were conducted and within 15 minutes Cory was ready to be escorted to the van that would take him out to the aircraft.

“If the pilot has an 8 hour mission, how does he eat or drink once he’s in his suit?” I asked Joey, knowing that it was probably a common question.

“See this small hole at the bottom of the helmet? We have a whole selection of food that we can give the pilots and they drink it through a straw that goes into that hole. They can have applesauce, beef stew, key lime pie, peaches, chocolate pudding, you name it!” Joey was excited to share the menu with me and I couldn’t help thinking that the key lime pie sounded pretty good. And after actually trying it, I can confirm it does taste exactly like key lime pie, just put through a blender.

The pilots get to choose what type of inflight food options they bring along. Squeezing the Key Lime Pie out of the tube was not very easy. Credit: NASA/Katie Stern
The pilots get to choose what type of inflight food options they bring along. Squeezing the Key Lime Pie out of the tube was not very easy. Credit: NASA/Katie Stern
After answering a few other questions of mine, Joey escorted Cory out to the jet. Witnessing the amount of preparation to get ready for the flight only made me want to learn more about the ER-2 and its history. It also gave me a huge appreciation for all of the expertise that goes into ensuring the success of the IMPACTS mission and other NASA missions.

Pilots Tim Williams and Cory Bartholomew pose in front of the NASA ER-2 with Project Manager Bernie Luna and Deputy Project Manager Katie Stern. Credit: NASA
Pilots Tim Williams and Cory Bartholomew pose in front of the NASA ER-2 with Project Manager Bernie Luna and Deputy Project Manager Katie Stern. Credit: NASA
AuthorEllen Gray
Posted onMarch 12, 2020
TagsIMPACTS
A Breathtaking View – Literally
Credit: NASA / Jessica Merzdorf
Credit: NASA / Jessica Merzdorf
By Jessica Merzdorf / GRAND MESA LODGE, COLORADO

After visiting with part of the SnowEx 2020 airborne team, we headed up the mountain to rendezvous with the ground team, stationed at Grand Mesa Lodge.

“Does anyone have a headache?” asked Jerry Newlin, SnowEx operations manager, as we left the little town of Delta and the rugged brown foot of the mountain range loomed up in front of us.

“Nope, feeling great” was our answer at the time. We traveled up the winding roads, commenting on the views that became more incredible the higher we went, and arrived at Grand Mesa Lodge in time for dinner and the evening briefing with the team.

But later that evening, at 10,500 feet, both video producer Ryan Fitzgibbons and I started developing symptoms of altitude sickness. Lower oxygen levels at higher elevations can cause headaches, nausea, shortness of breath, dizziness and other symptoms as the body adjusts. Sometimes the symptoms resolve on their own as the body gets used to the conditions; after a long, rough night of intense headaches and nausea, I gratefully accepted an herbal medication from the Grand Mesa Lodge owners. (Severe cases of altitude sickness require quickly moving back down to lower elevations. The ops team kept a close eye on me to make sure I didn’t need medical attention.)

After I took a nap back at my cabin and started to feel better, we checked in with Jerry and were cleared to snowmobile up to the snow pits.

The ground team’s daily “commute” varies depending on where they’re working that day, but it can be as much as 16 miles of hills, curves, bouncy stretches and incredible views of the valley below.

The SnowEx team reached the field sites via daily snowmobile trips. The ride is bumpy and can take 45 minutes to 2 hours, depending on where they’re working on the mesa. They towed their instruments and gear on sleds behind the snowmobiles. Credit: NASA / Jessica Merzdorf
The SnowEx team reached the field sites via daily snowmobile trips. The ride is bumpy and can take 45 minutes to 2 hours, depending on where they’re working on the mesa. They towed their instruments and gear on sleds behind the snowmobiles. Credit: NASA / Jessica Merzdorf
At each of the snow pits in this 3-week phase, the SnowEx ground team digs until they reach the ground, exposing a “wall” of snow where they take their measurements: Depth, density, water content, temperature, reflectance and particle size.

“We can see, and even hear, how the snow’s characteristics change from top to bottom,” said Chris Hiemstra, a researcher with the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers’ Cold Regions Research and Engineering Laboratory (CRREL). “The newest snow at the top is fluffy and loose. Below that, the wind has packed it into dense layers. The snow at the bottom has more water and the particles are sharper. When you dig into it, it sounds different than the other layers at the top.”

When we stopped by deputy project scientist Carrie Vuyovich’s pit, we heard the story of the “strong work mouse,” and saw a snow statue (made from wind-packed snow, incidentally) built in the mouse’s honor.

The SnowEx “mascot” for 2020 was the “strong work mouse,” honoring the small field mice that visited the snow pits during the first two weeks of data collection. Suzanne Craig of the National Snow and Ice Data Center records data next to a snow sculpture of the strong work mouse. Credit: NASA / Jessica Merzdorf
The SnowEx “mascot” for 2020 was the “strong work mouse,” honoring the small field mice that visited the snow pits during the first two weeks of data collection. Suzanne Craig of the National Snow and Ice Data Center records data next to a snow sculpture of the strong work mouse. Credit: NASA / Jessica Merzdorf
“There were these little mice that came to visit us in the first couple of weeks,” she said. “We’d be in pits, and these little mice would come running across the snow – one came down into the pit and hung out with us for a while, another team had a mouse running along beside them, and another member had a mouse come right up next to his boot. So that became our mascot – the ‘strong work mouse.’”

Not all of the research takes place in pits. Team members on skis used snow micro-penetrometers (SMP’s) to measure hardness and microstructure throughout the snow layers with incredibly high precision: The SMP takes 250 measurements every millimeter. Other snowshoe-wearing scientists used MagnaProbes, which have a magnetic probe that goes into the snow and a “basket” that rests on top. The distance between the two parts provides a highly accurate, GPS-tagged measurement of snow depth, and is many times faster than writing depth measurements in a notebook.

SnowEx 2020 project scientist Hans-Peter (HP) Marshall drives his snowmobile in a tight clockwise circle called a “radar Hiemstra spiral”, taking active radar measurements of the snow. The Twin Otter aircraft carrying SWESARR will later fly over this circle and take similar measurements. Credit: NASA / Jessica Merzdorf
SnowEx 2020 project scientist Hans-Peter (HP) Marshall drives his snowmobile in a tight clockwise circle called a “radar Hiemstra spiral”, taking active radar measurements of the snow. The Twin Otter aircraft carrying SWESARR will later fly over this circle and take similar measurements. Credit: NASA / Jessica Merzdorf
SnowEx project scientist Hans-Peter (HP) Marshall and Mike Durand, an associate professor at Ohio State University, used snowmobiles to create tight clockwise circles of radar measurements. This spiral sampling strategy is called a “Hiemstra spiral” after Chris Hiemstra, who developed them using the MagnaProbe, Marshall said. His snowmobile carried an active radar instrument, which generates pulses that bounce off the snow and the layers.  These pulses are timed to nanosecond accuracy, allowing estimates of snow depth, water equivalent and thickness of major layers, 100 times per second. Durand’s had a passive instrument that measured the radiation naturally generated by earth and scattered by snow.

If these measurements sound familiar, that’s because they’re the same types, frequencies, and polarizations as the airborne instrument SWESARR, Marshall said. The Twin Otter aircraft flies over these spirals and takes the same measurements in the same location. Later, the two teams can compare the data and see how well they align with each other and the standard snow pit and depth observations.  Data from both the active radar and passive microwave sensors on SWESARR will be combined to estimate snow properties such as snow water equivalent.

On the last day of data collection, Vuyovich revealed that the team had successfully collected data from 153 snow pits and 6 SWESARR flights in just three weeks — even more than originally planned.

SnowEx 2020 operations manager Jerry Newlin (ATA Aerospace) caught Chris Hiemstra (U.S. Army Corps of Engineers’ Cold Regions Research and Engineering Laboratory) in the reflection of his goggles during one of their daily snowmobile commutes. "It looks like Chris is collecting data on the Moon," Newlin said. Credit: NASA / Jerry Newlin
SnowEx 2020 operations manager Jerry Newlin (ATA Aerospace) caught Chris Hiemstra (U.S. Army Corps of Engineers’ Cold Regions Research and Engineering Laboratory) in the reflection of his goggles during one of their daily snowmobile commutes. “It looks like Chris is collecting data on the Moon,” Newlin said. Credit: NASA / Jerry Newlin
But SnowEx is off to a great start, not wrapping up. SnowEx 2020 has another phase: The time series. Smaller, local ground teams are currently performing weekly snow measurements at sites in Colorado, Utah, Idaho, New Mexico and California through March, and bi-weekly in April and May, at the same time as UAVSAR overflights. UAVSAR is an L-band InSAR (radar) instrument developed by NASA’s Jet Propulsion Laboratory. The time series will give the researchers data on how snow changes over time, especially as it melts in the spring.

When asked about the best memories they will take home from the mesa, each team member’s answer was the same: The team.

“The best part has been the team,” Vuyovich said. “The people that have been out here have been working super hard, and it’s been a lot of fun.”

“These kinds of intensive field campaigns form bonds that last a career,” said Marshall. “Chris Hiemstra and I met during the last big series of field experiments 17 years ago, and we have been working together ever since.  The younger generation in particular really stepped up this campaign – it will be exciting to see where their careers take them.”

AuthorEllen Gray
Posted onFebruary 19, 2020
TagsSnowEx
Snow Science Two Miles in the Sky
Grand Mesa, Colorado has an elevation of 10,500 feet, and from the Land’s End Observatory, you can see across the valley to Utah. The large, flat surface of the mesa is perfect for SnowEx 2020’s instrument testing and validation activities. Credit: NASA / Jessica Merzdorf
Grand Mesa, Colorado has an elevation of 10,500 feet, and from the Land’s End Observatory, you can see across the valley to Utah. The large, flat surface of the mesa is perfect for SnowEx 2020’s instrument testing and validation activities. Credit: NASA / Jessica Merzdorf
By Jessica Merzdorf / GRAND MESA LODGE, COLORADO

What is it like to do science nearly 2 miles above sea level?

At a majestic 10,500 feet elevation, Grand Mesa is the world’s tallest mesa, or flat-topped mountain. It’s also the site of an intense month of data collection by NASA’s SnowEx 2020, a ground and airborne campaign testing a variety of instruments that measure the water contained in winter snowpack.

Snow is vital for Earth’s ecosystems and humans, from its temperature-regulating reflection of sunlight and insulating properties, to its life-sustaining water as it melts in the springtime. SnowEx is taking coordinated measurements on the ground and in the air to compare how well different instruments work in different conditions. Not only does this help them improve measurement techniques in the future, but eventually, NASA can use this information in developing a future snow satellite mission.

The “golden” measurement they’re after is snow water equivalent, or SWE (pronounced “swee”).

“SWE is our measure of the volume of water held in the snowpack,” said Carrie Vuyovich, a research scientist at NASA’s Goddard Space Flight Center and SnowEx 2020’s deputy project scientist. “It’s such a crucial measurement because the winter snow is a natural reservoir – when it melts in the spring, it feeds the groundwater, lakes and streams.”

To understand SWE, imagine taking a cubic foot of snow, and measuring how much water is left in the container after you melt it. The amount of water depends on how densely packed the snow is and how big its particles are. Measuring these properties for small amounts of snow and calculating SWE is fairly simple – but measuring it spatially for an entire snowpack over a large mountain range? That requires instruments on planes or satellites that can sense snow properties from a distance in bigger swaths.

We met up with SnowEx operations manager Jerry Newlin of ATA Aerospace on Monday. We were invited to stay with the team during their final week of data collection for this phase of the project. Our first stop was with the airborne team, at Montrose Regional Airport in Montrose, Colorado.

When we arrived, the DHC-6 Twin Otter aircraft was grounded due to high winds over the mesa. The Twin Otter carries SWESARR – the Snow Water Equivalent Synthetic Aperture Radar and Radiometer. Developed at NASA Goddard, SWESARR uses active and passive microwave instruments to calculate SWE. Its precise measurements require precise flying, and the 50-knot winds were too strong for the plane to collect good data.

“SWESARR’s active instrument transmits a pulse, which penetrates the snowpack, hitting and interacting with all these little snow particles, and bouncing back to the instrument,” said Batu Osmanoglu, a research scientist at NASA Goddard and the principal investigator of the SWESARR team. “The passive side is more like a thermal camera, collecting the natural radiation coming from the snowpack. These two pieces of information are what we use to infer the SWE for a given area.”

The plane also carries CASIE, the Compact Airborne System for Imaging the Environment. CASIE was developed at the University of Washington and collects data on snow surface temperature, which is important for both validating satellite data and improving models of snow’s surface energy balance – the exchange of energy between the snow, the atmosphere and the ground beneath.

Shortly after we arrived, the team convened for a new weather report: The winds had calmed in time for a late afternoon flight. The airport team prepped the plane for flight while the instrument team got SWESARR ready to go.

The DHC-6 Twin Otter carrying the SWESARR and CASIE instruments was grounded in the morning due to high winds, but took off late in the afternoon for one flight over the mesa. Credit: NASA / Jessica Merzdorf
The DHC-6 Twin Otter carrying the SWESARR and CASIE instruments was grounded in the morning due to high winds, but took off late in the afternoon for one flight over the mesa. The team completed all 6 planned SWESARR flights. Credit: NASA / Jessica Merzdorf
After takeoff, it was time for us to take off too: The trip from Montrose to Grand Mesa is just under two hours, and we wanted to reach the lodge before dark. We were hoping for a good night’s rest – after catching up with the airborne team, our next stop was traveling by snowmobile to spend time with the ground team on the mesa.

AuthorEllen Gray
Posted onFebruary 18, 2020
TagsSnowEx
A Wintry Flight
The NASA P-3 Orion on the runway ready for IMPACTS’ second science flight on Jan. 25, 2020, at NASA’s Wallops Flight Facility in Virginia. Credit: NASA/Katie Jepson
The NASA P-3 Orion on the runway ready for IMPACTS’ second science flight on Jan. 25, 2020, at NASA’s Wallops Flight Facility in Virginia. Credit: NASA/Katie Jepson
By Ellen Gray /NASA’S WALLOPS FLIGHT FACILITY, VIRGINIA/

After a cloudy and rainy morning, by 1:50 pm the sun had come out and the skies were clear for take-off at NASA’s Wallops Flight Facility in Virginia. The P-3 Orion research aircraft outfitted with eleven instruments to measure conditions inside snow clouds was heading north to a storm system over New York and Vermont for the second science flight of the Investigation of Microphysics and Precipitation for Atlantic Coast Threatening Snowstorms, or IMPACTS field campaign.

NASA’s high-flying ER-2 was already in the air. Based out of Hunter Army Air Field in Savannah, Georgia, it had an extra hour to fly so that the two planes—the ER-2 at 60,000 feet and the P-3 starting at 18,000 feet—would arrive at the same time and fly along the same path to make simultaneous measurements.

Three hours before takeoff at Hunter Army Air Field in Savannah, Georgia, ER-2 pilot Cory Bartholomew was helped into his full-pressure suit and breathed pure oxygen to help remove nitrogen from his bloodstream. This process prevents decompression sickness at high-altitudes. Credit: NASA/Katie Stern
Three hours before takeoff at Hunter Army Air Field in Savannah, Georgia, ER-2 pilot Cory Bartholomew was helped into his full-pressure suit and breathed pure oxygen to help remove nitrogen from his bloodstream. This process prevents decompression sickness at high-altitudes. Credit: NASA/Katie Stern
Since we were flying into bad weather, I was worried about a bumpy ride—and we got it. Our flight path led us out over the ocean first to approach Long Island from the south. At thirty minutes after take-off Claire Robinson from NASA’s Langley Research Center prepped the first of two dropsondes to drop from a tube at the back of the plane into the storm over the ocean. A dropsonde is a small instrument package in what looks like a paper-towel roll. It has a parachute and a radio transmitter that sends data on temperature, humidity and wind speed as it falls, giving a vertical profile of the atmosphere from the plane to the ground.

Dropsonde operator Claire Robinson of NASA’s Langley Research Center hangs on to her seat at the back of the plane through turbulence while she waits for us to fly over the drop point. The dropsonde is inside the black tube in the bottom center of the picture. Credit: NASA/Katie Jepson
Dropsonde operator Claire Robinson of NASA’s Langley Research Center hangs on to her seat at the back of the plane through turbulence while she waits for us to fly over the drop point. The dropsonde is inside the black tube in the bottom center of the picture. Credit: NASA/Katie Jepson
While Claire was watching her monitor for the plane to be over the right spot, we hit turbulence that made it feel like we were going over bumps on a roller-coaster. It got bad enough we needed to return to our seats in the ten minutes between the first and second dropsondes. The turbulence evened out fairly quickly though, especially once we were back over land where the upward movement of air was less severe. Bumps returned periodically throughout the flight, but it ended up being smoother overall than expected.

After the dropsondes were away we continued north over Connecticut and western Massachusetts where we turned left to start the first of three bowtie flight patterns, two over southeastern New York and one over Vermont. Bowties are these large triangular patterns that approach the storm from many different angles.

The P-3 flight path is shown in orange. We started out northbound over the ocean and then did the New York bowtie twice, then the Vermont bowtie once before flying home south over Philadelphia. Credit: NASA
The P-3 flight path is shown in orange. We started out northbound over the ocean and then did the New York bowtie twice, then the Vermont bowtie once before flying home south over Philadelphia. Credit: NASA
The ER-2 flight path is shown in yellow on top of the orange P-3 track. For the majority of the flight the two planes were in a “stacked” formation. Credit: NASA
The ER-2 flight path is shown in yellow on top of the orange P-3 track. For the majority of the flight the two planes were in a “stacked” formation. Credit: NASA
“The atmosphere is not a layer cake,” said atmospheric scientist Sandra Yuter from North Carolina State University, when I spoke with her before the flight. She’s in charge of plotting the flight paths to maximize the science measurements based on the forecasts two-days ahead of time, which she then sends to the pilots and aircraft coordinators who will iterate on it to make the final flight plan.

The atmosphere is instead more like a cake with a marbled interior—swirls and wiggly lines sliced one way, large patches and different swirls when sliced another. “We’re not expecting the same cross-sections in different parts of the storm,” Sandra said. “Bowties give you those multiple angles.”

At the top of the first bowtie over New York, we started out at 18,000 feet, high above the freezing level (0°C). (About half-way through we descended to 16,000 feet at the request of Air Traffic Control.) Mike Poellot of the University of North Dakota and today’s Flight Scientist, sitting in the cockpit to coordinate between the science team and the pilots, asked over the headset, “Cloud probes what are you seeing?”

Snowflakes flashed by at Greg Sova’s station as the multiple cloud probes imaged snowflakes, water droplets, and ice as we flew through the cloud. Credit: NASA/Katie Jepson
Snowflakes flashed by at Greg Sova’s station as the multiple cloud probes imaged snowflakes, water droplets, and ice as we flew through the cloud. Credit: NASA/Katie Jepson
In the main cabin, Greg Sova, a grad student at the University of North Dakota and Starboard Wing Instrument Operator, answered the first of many such check-ins. On his monitor, streams of tiny pictures from his instrument scrolled by. The tiny pictures were of cloud, ice, and snow particles, most less than a millimeter big, that had just been imaged at ~300 mph.

On that first pass of the bowtie, he was seeing from the cloud probes, “Columns and dendrites but a lot of shattering.”

Images from the Hawkeye Cloud Particle Imager throughout the Jan. 25 flight. Left—capped columns. Middle—aggregates. Right—small spheres and dendrites. The cloud probes instruments logged 23,651,553 cloud particles during the 5.8-hour flight. Credit: NASA
Images from the Hawkeye Cloud Particle Imager throughout the Jan. 25 flight. Left—capped columns. Middle—aggregates. Right—small spheres and dendrites. The 2D-S cloud probe instrument logged 23,651,553 cloud particles during the 5.8-hour flight. Credit: NASA
Columns and dendrites are types of snow crystals and were also common in later check-ins as we continued on. So were aggregates, a bunch of snowflakes stuck together in a mass, thin needles, and at lower altitude, spheres that were probably water droplets as we did the second bowtie at lower altitude where the air temperature was warmer. Sometimes it was mix of all three. At times it would switch back and forth as we passed through air with different characteristics—remember that marble cake analogy?

At one point on the northern bowtie over Vermont, Greg reported that we’d passed from seeing more liquid droplet spheres to being back in crystals of snowflake plates, dendrites, with a column or two. Then he added, “And as soon as I said that we’re back into small spheres.”

While the P-3 flew through the clouds, the ER-2 paced us from high above with its suite of remote sensing instruments. The two planes were in sync, for the most part passing over the same legs of the bowties less than 5 minutes apart. Each bowtie took about an hour, and a little after 6:00 pm we dropped to 12,000 feet for the flight home, while the storm system continued east.

The view of Philadelphia at night from the cockpit of the P-3 on our way back to Wallops. Credit: NASA/Katie Jepson
The view of Philadelphia at night from the cockpit of the P-3 on our way back to Wallops. Credit: NASA/Katie Jepson
“I think was good mission,” Mike said when we got back. “The instruments seem to work well, aircraft coordination seemed to go well, and we definitely got into some weather. A lot of precipitation down low that was occurring, and I think it was more along the lines of what we’re looking to do in this project.”

In the days that follow, the instrument teams will begin processing the data they collected, while the forecasters look out for the next storm on the horizon.

AuthorEllen Gray
Posted onJanuary 27, 2020
TagsIMPACTS
Meet IMPACTS’ Student Forecasters
Map of freezing levels - the altitude at which the temperature is 0°C in the atmosphere. This is one of the things forecasters look at to find the snow the fly through and keep the plane safe. Credit: NASA
Map of freezing levels – the altitude at which the temperature is 0°C in the atmosphere. This is one of the things forecasters look at to find the snow the fly through and keep the plane safe. Credit: NASA
By Ellen Gray /NASA’S WALLOPS FLIGHT FACILITY, VIRGINIA/

The IMPACTS team is what makes the field campaign happen. Over 200 people are contributing to the project from aircraft crews and managers, to support and logistics staff, to the scientists running the instruments and asking the big questions. They include veteran pilots and mission managers, university and NASA researchers who’ve done field campaigns before, and graduate students on their first campaign.

Field campaigns provide valuable training and perspective in researchers’ early careers. We caught up with three students who are on the rotating roster for the IMPACTS forecasting team. Their responses have been edited for clarity.

Sebastian Harkema is lead forecaster this week, working in IMPACTS Mission Operations Center just off the P-3 hangar at Wallops Flight Facility. Credit: NASA
Sebastian Harkema is lead forecaster this week, working in IMPACTS Mission Operations Center just off the P-3 hangar at Wallops Flight Facility. Credit: NASA
My name is Sebastian Harkema. I’m a first year PhD candidate at the University of Alabama in Huntsville. This is my first field campaign in general so I’m super excited about this. I’m actually studying snowfall so I’m going to be using the IMPACTS data as part of my PhD for the next three years. Specifically, I’m looking at thundersnow, so I’m hoping to use some of the instrumentation to look at that and to understand how lightning and snowfall can be used in nowcasting—predicting heavy snowfall, where the models really have trouble in that near-term period where forecasters really need that information.

Being a forecaster is different. Going from research to being an actual forecaster is kind of challenging. Because when you’re a researcher you’re staring at a TV screen or a monitor all day. For forecasting you’re doing that but it’s in a completely different environment. As for my schedule, showing up at 5:45 am in the morning, having to put a presentation together by 8:45 am and presenting at 9 am, that’s a challenge unto itself, let alone trying to understand what is going on in the atmosphere. So I definitely give a lot of credit to all the forecasters throughout the United States, and the world—Props to you guys! It’s a lot of hard work and I definitely appreciate it a lot more than I did in the past.

Ben Kiel in the IMPACTS Mission Ops Center at Wallops Flight Facility. Credit: NASA
Ben Kiel in the IMPACTS Mission Ops Center at Wallops Flight Facility. Credit: NASA
I’m Ben Kiel and I’m a Masters student at Stonybrook University in New York. With IMPACTS, I’m helping out with storm forecasts, if there are storms to forecast for. It’s been quite a bit of challenge I would have to say. We were hoping for more storms than what we’ve had so far. It’s kind of funny, most people want good weather, we want bad weather.

This one that we’re looking going after Saturday is one where, if the pattern was more active it’s one we wouldn’t prefer to chase because it’s a messy system. There’s a lot of dry air getting into it. It’s a very warm system. There’s going to be a lot of rain. At least there will be snow aloft. There’s certainly things we can learn from snow aloft, because that’s how this rain is forming as it’s staring out as snow and then falling down and then turning into rain. So we’ll take it.

My main focus will not actually be directly related to IMPACTS. I’m actually working with IMPACTS mission scientist Brian Colle, I’ll be doing a project related to machine learning. It’s a different sort of problem, trying to figure out or explain why our weather models are so variable. We’re trying to find better explanations so that we can pinpoint and improve them. So that’s not necessarily directly related to the IMPACTS project but the data that comes from here will probably certainly get ingested into my work as time goes on. All of these projects end up connected in some way that one acts as a validation for the other. We’ll see what happens there. I’m looking forward to it.

Phillip Yeh and Joe Finlon look at forecasts in the IMPACTS Mission Operations Center, at Wallops Flight Facility, Jan 23.
Phillip Yeh and Joe Finlon look at forecasts in the IMPACTS Mission Operations Center at Wallops Flight Facility, Jan 23. Credit: NASA
My name is Phillip Yeh and I grew up in Parsippany, New Jersey, and I’m currently at Stonybrook University as a PhD student. My focus for my PhD project will likely be using the data that we gather from the IMPACTS project to understand these snow bands associated with these snow storms here in the North East.

I am helping with forecasting for the IMPACTS project. So forecasting involves many things. A lot of it involves looking at the weather models and trying to figure out where the storm is going to be, especially in regard to the timing of the storm, in regard to where the rain/snow line is going to set up, and in regard to where we should be flying the plane. This is my first field campaign. I think the biggest thing I’m looking forward to is the opportunity to fly on the P-3 and the second biggest thing is being able to launch weather balloons, which I’ll do when I leave Wallops and go back to Stonybrook where we’re doing that.

I’ve always loved snow ever since I was young, and often times watched as a snow storm runs too far to the south or to the north and just misses us, or occasionally when the snow hits us perfectly, and also seeing how the forecast models may struggle with getting the location of a storm right.

Global sea level rise will be one of the major environmental challenges of the 21st Century. Oceans Melting Greenland (OMG) will pave the way for improved estimates of sea level rise by addressing the question: To what extent are the oceans melting Greenland’s ice from below? Over a five-year campaign, OMG will observe changing water temperatures on the continental shelf surrounding Greenland, and how marine glaciers react to the presence of warm, salty Atlantic Water. The complicated geometry of the sea floor steers currents on the shelf and often determines whether Atlantic Water can reach into the long narrow fjords and interact with the coastal glaciers. Because knowledge of these pathways is a critical component of modeling the interaction between the oceans and ice sheet, OMG will facilitate improved measurements of the shape and depth of the sea floor in key regions as well.

Greenland Fjord Diagram

The diagram above represents a typical glacier in Greenland. Below the cold, fresh layer near the surface a layer of warm, salty water reaches into the fjords to melt the glacier's edge. OMG will measure the volume and extent of this warm layer each year and relate it to thinning and retreat of the glaciers.

OMG will use NASA’s G-III to fly the Glacier and Ice Surface Topography Interferometer (GLISTIN-A) in order to generate high resolution, high precision elevation measurements of Greenland’s coastal glaciers during the spring. Annual surveys by GLISTIN will measure glacier thinning and retreat over the preceding season. A second aircraft campaign will occur each year in the summer to deploy 250 expendable temperature and salinity probes along the continental shelf to measure the volume, extent, of warm, salty Atlantic Water. These data, along with fundamental new and critical observations of airborne marine gravity and ship-based observations of the sea floor geometry will provide a revolutionary data set for modeling ocean/ice interactions and lead to improved estimates of global sea level rise.

For all of the apparent hardness of their skeletons, corals are rather fragile. Corals thrive under very specific conditions; in particular, they grow best within a small window of temperatures. If the water gets too hot or too cold, corals start to bleach and sometimes die.

The past two years have been the two hottest in the global temperature record, and coral reefs around the world are suffering because of it. The potent El Niño has amplified the problem. As a result, national and international science agencies have declared one of the worst global coral bleaching events on record.

“We are currently experiencing the longest global coral bleaching event ever observed,” said Mark Eakin, coordinator of NOAA’s Coral Reef Watch, in a February 2016 statement. “We may be looking at a 2- to 2.5-year-long event. Some areas have already seen bleaching two years in a row.”

Bleaching occurs when the algae that live inside corals (and give them some of their colors) are expelled due to stress, such as higher-than-normal water temperatures or pollution. The loss of the algae means the loss of a food source for the corals. Under extreme bleaching, corals become more susceptible to disease. Bleaching does not necessarily mean death for a reef, but it can often lead to it.

The images above and below are maps of sea surface temperature anomalies (SSTAs) in various regions over the past year. The maps do not depict absolute temperatures; instead, they show how much water temperatures were above (red) or below (blue) the long-term average for the same months from 2003 to 2012. Gray areas are too close to land and coastal shallows for a clear signal in this data set.

The map at the top of this page shows sea surface temperature anomalies for the southwestern Pacific Ocean for February and March 2016. The map below depicts equatorial Atlantic, Caribbean, and Pacific waters around the Americas in October and November 2015. The final map is a global view of SSTAs from November 2015 through February 2016, the peak of this winter’s El Niño.


October - November 2015

The maps were built with data from the Microwave Optimally Interpolated SST product, a NASA-supported effort at Remote Sensing Systems. The research team combines measurements from the U.S. Navy’s WindSAT instrument on the Coriolis satellite and the AMSR2 instrument on Japan’s GCOM-W. The sensors observe emissions of microwaves and infrared light from the sea surface, capturing the temperature of the top few millimeters of the water.

Temperatures on these maps show above-average readings, but do not necessarily look extreme in the areas around the reefs. But keep in mind that corals are sensitive to relatively minor changes in temperature. Researchers from NOAA also point out that sustained heat stress over a long period of time—weeks to months—is more damaging than brief, extreme events.

Researchers from Australia’s Coral Bleaching Taskforce have reported that nearly 93 percent of the Great Barrier Reef has been affected in some way by the bleaching event. Temperatures around the reef most recently peaked in February and March 2016. After conducting aerial and in-water surveys, scientists observed that 81 percent of the reefs between Cairns, Australia, and Papua-New Guinea have been severely bleached, with another 18 percent partially bleached. Some reports suggest 50 percent of the corals might be dead already. Along the central latitudes of the reef system, 33 percent of the reefs were severely bleached, with another 56 partly affected. In the southernmost reaches, 1 percent was severely bleached and 74 percent had some level of distress. The central and southern portions were actually aided a bit by Cyclone Winston. The severe storm churned up enough cold water to reduce surface water temperatures and moderate the bleaching.

In the Caribbean and the reefs of the Florida Keys, bleaching events were most severe in the fall of 2015. Reefs around the Hawaiian Islands, Fiji, and other Pacific islands have been severely stressed and bleached. With 2016 global temperatures already setting records, there is concern that bleaching could occur again in 2016.

Waiting for Good Snow
NASA's P-3 research aircraft will be flying through clouds during IMPACTS to study snow. Credit: Joe Finlan
NASA’s P-3 research aircraft will be flying through clouds during IMPACTS to study snow. Credit: Joe Finlon
By Ellen Gray / NASA’S WALLOPS FLIGHT FACILITY, VIRGINIA/

Nothing to be done.

When your field campaign depends on chasing winter storms you have to wait for the weather to arrive in its own time. For the science team of the Investigation of Microphysics Precipitation for Atlantic Coast-Threatening Snowstorms, or IMPACTS, campaign that means carefully watching the weather forecasts and then making the most of it when it arrives.

IMPACTS is a field campaign all about snow. This week, we’re with the team at NASA’s Wallops Flight Facility in Virginia, where the P-3 research plane is outfitted with instruments ready to fly into winter storms over the next six weeks in order to learn more about how snowstorms behave. A second plane, NASA’s ER-2 based out of Hunter Army Air Field in Savannah, Georgia, for the campaign, will fly high above the clouds with satellite-simulating instruments aboard to measure the snow clouds from above.

One of the big questions is why do snow clouds organize themselves into bands of heavy and light snow fall? The ultimate goal is to improve forecasts of where and how much snow will fall, especially over the densely populated U.S. East Coast where storms are nicknamed “Snowpocalypse” and “Snowmageddon” because of the disruption they can cause.

IMPACTS' 9am weather briefing on Jan 22 where the team discussed the upcoming snowstorm. Credit: NASA/ Katie Jepson
IMPACTS’ 9am weather briefing on Jan 22 where the team discussed the upcoming snowstorm. Credit: NASA/ Katie Jepson
At the daily 9:00 am weather briefing on Wednesday, the team looked at several different weather models – the same ones used by the National Weather Service, the Weather Channel and other forecasters – to find the next storm they want to target.

“High pressure is finally moving out! Whooo!” said Sebastian Harkema, the lead forecaster, to open the briefing.

If you’re familiar with your local weather news, high pressure usually accompanies sunny skies and clear conditions – the opposite of what the science team is looking for. Instead they’re interested in flying into the bad weather. And there’s a developing storm system that will move across Pennsylvania and up toward Massachusetts, New York and Vermont on Saturday and Sunday.

The big question of the day is, do they schedule one flight through it, or two on back-to-back days?

The advantage of flying twice would be more data collected. However, the human factor of flying two days in a row means that between flights is a 12-hour mandatory crew rest, so the timing of the second flight may not be the best time to sample the second part of the storm – and there’s a chance that the snowing part of the storm may have passed by the time they get out there.

The advantage of doing one flight is that the science team can pick the time and place they think will have the best snow.

The other logistical consideration is the mobile team of researchers from the University of Illinois, Champaign-Urbana, who are driving their vehicles on highways and back roads to be below the storm while the P-3 and ER-2 aircraft fly above it. From the ground they are sending up balloon sondes – instruments to measure the temperature and humidity from the ground to the clouds. They’d likely only be able to make one of two locations, since they’d have to drive through the very snow or cold rain the science team was measuring to get to the second spot three states away.

Forecasting the upcoming weather is a one of the most important jobs for planning flights for IMPACTS. Credit: NASA / Katie Jepson
Forecasting the upcoming weather is one of the most important jobs for planning flights for IMPACTS. Credit: NASA / Katie Jepson
In the end, the team waits for the next run of the models, which come out every 6 hours, before making a decision. At the times and locations that look the most promising – Central Pennsylvania, the tri-corner where Massachusetts, New York and Vermont meet – they look at how wet or dry the air is and the likely temperatures, trying to discern the best spots to sample snow.

“It’s a messy storm,” said IMPACTS Principal Investigator Lynn McMurdie of the University of Washington. The temperatures are on the warm side, and there’s indications of tendrils of dry air throughout, which can stop precipitation. It’s unclear in some spots whether they’d find rain or wet snow.

The verdict: one flight on Saturday to pick the best time and place. Three days out, they’re looking at Vermont, but they won’t make any final decisions until they have a better forecast to help narrow the timing and location down in the next day or so. Still, the flight planners are already working up a preliminary plan so they’ll be ready to refine it when conditions become more clear tomorrow.

AuthorEllen Gray
Posted onJanuary 22, 2020
TagsIMPACTS
IceBridge Takes Flight from Down Under
NASA’s Gulfstream GV aircraft is based in Tasmania, Australia this fall for Operation IceBridge flights to East Antarctica. (Credit: Linette Boisvert/NASA)
NASA’s Gulfstream GV aircraft is based in Tasmania, Australia this fall for Operation IceBridge flights to East Antarctica. Credit: Linette Boisvert/NASA
by Kate Ramsayer

Operation IceBridge took off on the first flight of its final polar campaign Thursday, with a route designed to measure the ice in a region of Antarctica the mission had not yet explored.

IceBridge has been gathering data on Arctic and Antarctic ice sheets, glaciers and sea ice for 10 years. It was designed to ‘bridge the gap’ in between the Ice, Cloud and land Elevation Satellite (ICESat), which stopped collecting data in 2009, and ICESat-2, which launched in September 2018. Over the past decade, IceBridge has been based out of airports in Alaska, Greenland, Chile, Argentina and Antarctica – but for this final polar campaign, it has a new base at Hobart in Tasmania, Australia.

The tongue of Antarctica’s Dibble Glacier, as seen from the first flight of IceBridge’s final polar campaign. (Credit: John Sonntag/NASA)
The tongue of Antarctica’s Dibble Glacier, as seen from the first flight of IceBridge’s final polar campaign. Credit: John Sonntag/NASA
With flights from Australia instead of South America, IceBridge is better poised to measure more of East Antarctica, said Brooke Medley, IceBridge deputy project scientist at NASA’s Goddard Space Flight Center. There, the vast store of ice covers an area about the size of the continental United States – and it’s relatively unexplored, compared to West Antarctica and the Antarctic Peninsula.

On Thursday’s flight (that’s Thursday, Australian time, which is late Wednesday/early Thursday in the U.S.), IceBridge flew over the Dibble Glacier and nearby regions of the ice sheet, taking measurements not only of the ice but of the bedrock below. Onboard NASA’s Gulfstream GV aircraft are multiple instruments, including two versions of the Airborne Topographic Mapper (a laser altimeter to measure ice height), the Multichannel Coherent Radar Depth Sounder (MCoRDS), a gravimeter and several other instruments.

Future flights will take measurements of additional glaciers and sections of the ice sheet, as well as sea ice. With ICESat-2 in orbit, IceBridge will also fly along some of the satellite’s orbital paths, to measure the same stretch of ice and help ensure the year-old satellite’s data is accurate.

The marginal ice zone in the Southern Ocean north of Wilkes Land Credit: John Sonntag/NASA
The marginal ice zone in the Southern Ocean north of Wilkes Land Credit: John Sonntag/NASA
This campaign is adding another element to the mix — in addition to the airborne and satellite measurements, scientists will be out on the ice taking height and density measurements as well. Researchers can then compare the data from the ground, air and space. Medley, who will be on the ice near Casey Station in Antarctica, said she’s looking forward to waving up at IceBridge as it flies over.

“I’m literally getting a new perspective: rather than looking down to the ice from the plane, I’m looking up from the ice to the plane!” she said. “It will be a very special experience.”

 

AuthorEllen Gray
Posted onOctober 24, 2019
TagsIceBridge
The New and the Lost World of Hunga Tonga-Hunga Ha’apai
The newly erupted cone (right), and pre-existing Hunga Tonga (to left), with SSV Robert C. Seamans. Credit: NASA
The newly erupted cone (right), and pre-existing Hunga Tonga (to left), with SSV Robert C. Seamans. Credit: NASA/ Dan Slayback
by Dan Slayback, NASA Research Scientist aboard the SSV Robert C. Seamans / KINGDOM OF TONGA /

What a week! Having just finished an expedition to Earth’s newest landmass, Hunga Tonga-Hunga Ha’apai (HTHH) in the Kingdom of Tonga a few days ago, I thought I’d write a few thoughts on this latest expedition to Earth’s newest landmass.

Shortly after the volcanic eruption that constructed this new island began in December 2014, we were alerted at NASA’s Goddard Space Flight Center, in Greenbelt, Maryland, and initiated collection of relevant satellite imagery. Closely following this over the next several months, we observed rapid erosion of the southern coast due to oceanic wave action, at one point breaching the crater wall and opening the crater lake to the sea. Based on observations to this point, we expected a relatively rapid and possibly complete disappearance of the new island, perhaps within months or at most a few years. But instead, the island has held on!

In mid-2018, with the island just over 3 1/2 years old, I was extremely fortunate to be invited to join a leg of the Sea Educational Association’s SEA Semester/SPICE (Sustainability in Polynesian Island Cultures and Ecosystems) program cruise through the southwest Pacific that passes conveniently close to HTHH. That exploratory visit, one year ago, was extremely valuable to let us get our feet wet (figuratively and literally) in understanding the island system from the ground, instead of solely from a satellite vantage point hundreds of miles in space. We made many useful observations, collected some good data, and gained a more practical human-scale understanding of the topography of the place (such as that the adjacent pre-existing islands, and their rocky shorelines, are almost fortress-like in their inaccessibility). We also saw things not accessible from space, such as the hundreds of nesting sooty terns, and details of the emergent vegetation.

My return this year was to extend and improve the observations we made last year, and to lay the groundwork for continued and new observations into the future. A significant advantage of traveling with SEA is the small army of 26 energetic undergraduates on board the ship, willing and able to help accomplish a wide variety of tasks we set for ourselves; without their help, much of what we accomplished would simply not have been feasible.

Sooty tern soaring in front of Hunga Tonga; Hunga. Credit: NASA
Sooty tern soaring in front of Hunga Tonga; Hunga. Credit: NASA/ Dan Slayback
The core goal of these field expeditions is to improve our understanding of the island’s brief evolutionary history and likely future. The island was formed by a surtseyan eruption, which is a relatively modest explosive eruption (compared to say, Mt St Helens or Mt Pinatubo) occurring in shallow waters. They are relatively common along the active Tonga trench (just over the past few days here, a smoke eruption has been reported further north in Tonga, sending plumes over 15,000 feet into the sky, and a magnitude 5.2 earthquake was reported to the east). But it is less common for such eruptions to construct stable landmasses that survive for more than a few months.

Over the past century, only two other surtseyan events have resulted in lasting edifices: Surtsey island in Iceland (erupted in the late 1960s; the type event), and Capelinhos on Faial in the Azores (mid/late 1950s). In Tonga, there are several examples of such eruptions forming short-lived islands over the past century, with the most recent erupting from the same submarine caldera as HTHH in 2009, only 1-2 km from the current cone; it washed away within half a year or so. The current cone may be persisting perhaps due to a larger volume of material ejected (giving it more time to stabilize before the oceanic wave action and pluvial (rain-caused) erosion erode it away), or perhaps its position between the pre-existing islands has provided a level of protection against oceanic wave erosion.

In any case, the appearance of a new landmass (approximately 190 hectacres or 475 acres in size) has presented the unique and rare opportunity to study a rapidly evolving landscape from space, while observable change is occurring over relatively short periods of time (months to years). One key question to understanding its erosional past and future is to better estimate where erosion is occurring, at what rates, and to isolate pluvial-based gully erosion of the flanks from oceanic wave abrasion of sea-cliffs.

Back home at Goddard Space Flight Center in Maryland, we have been using high resolution stereo satellite imagery to provide one estimate of this, but the extreme relief (gullies and canyons with sheer walls up to 30 meters high) is difficult to accurately resolve with standard space-based stereo pair imagery. Thus, we deployed small commercial drones during our field visit to map the entire island at greater than 10-times the resolution of even the best commercial satellites. With more time and cooperative weather, we could have flown lower and achieved even finer resolution, but we did not want to risk flying the drone to a watery grave in questionable weather. The drone imagery will be processed using structure from motion (SfM) techniques that are better able to resolve the high relief topography than we can achieve with simple stereo pairs.  We collected such imagery last year as well, so when processing and analysis is complete, we will have useful estimates for the quantity of erosion occurring in different regions, and from different processes (rainfall vs oceanic wave abrasion). As we also installed a precipitation gauge on this expedition, in the future we will be able to quantitatively model observed erosion as a function of rainfall amounts and rates.

Hunga Tonga from deep gully on new cone. Credit: NASA
Hunga Tonga from deep gully on new cone. Credit: NASA/ Dan Slayback
The other key question about the island’s future is whether a hydrochemical process termed palagonitization is, in the presence of heat and water, cementing the layers of ash into a much more durable substance, termed palagonite. If the core of the cone is slowly cooking into palagonite, it will be much more likely to resist erosional forces for many decades or longer. If this process is not occurring, then the observed erosional forces may reduce the island to little more than a shoal in a couple of decades.

During our visits, we have collected small fragments of palagonite-looking minerals (lab analysis is needed to confirm), and areas exposed along the southern cliffs (where the rate of oceanic wave erosion is significant) visibly resemble exposed palagonitized zones on Capelinhos and Surtsey. A key finding from this expedition included areas of substantial subsurface heat, detected along the shore of the crater lake at depths from the surface to less than a meter. We had hoped to find cracks venting hot gases in places, and brought along an infrared camera to help detect such, but in the end, a student literally stumbled across this sub-surface heat. While handling a small raft (deployed for sonar analysis of the crater lake bottom), her legs plunged through the soft sediment at the edge of the lake to a depth of a few feet, and found unusually warm pockets. We confirmed temperatures of 100-130F in several zones around the lake, simply by pulling up the sediment by hand.  In any case, this suggests residual heat is circulating near the surface, and therefore may well be doing so within the core of the cone, establishing a critical condition for the formation of palagonite.

Along with helping to answer these key questions, our visit facilitated exploration of other important facets of the island’s evolution, including: bathymetric surveys of the crater lake and coastal shallows; surveys of the flora and fauna; and surveys of and collection of accumulated garbage.

Tern soaring near Hunga Tonga. Credit: NASA
Tern soaring near Hunga Tonga. Credit: NASA/ Dan Slayback
One change that I found particularly striking from one year ago was the development of the vegetation establishing itself on the new land.  In 2018, there were three primary patches of vegetation: two in depositional areas to the northwest and southwest of the cone (near the pre-existing Hunga Ha’apai island), and one on the western flank of the cone itself. Last year, the northwest patch was heavily dominated by near mono-culture of beach morning glory, but this year was host to a much more diverse assemblage of plants (including morning glory, but no longer dominated by it). Conversely, the patch on the western flank of the cone appeared less diverse than last year. However, last year it hosted a boisterous colony of nesting sooty terns, while this year there were no birds present.

Which highlights another major change – the distribution of bird life on the island system. Last year we found nesting sooty terns in two large aggregations numbering likely 1000 birds or more in total in the center and west of the system. This year, however, those areas were entirely unused by the terns, while a smaller nesting colony was found far to the east, abutting the pre-existing Hunga Tonga edifice. We also observed rats and owls, and thus suspect there may be more complex ecological interactions at play here (the terns nest on the ground). However, other bird species were more prevalent, including species not seen last year such as red-footed boobies, tropicbirds, and a good number of petrels and shearwaters. We also saw a much larger number of frigate birds (both ‘lesser’ and ‘greater’ species), than the few observed last year. Although we had a dedicated observer to survey birds (and plants) which helped substantially with bird identification (and relieved the pressure to do this myself, personally imposed as an amateur birder), it was still obvious to me that more species, and more individuals of more species (except the sooty terns), were present this year.

Frigatebird soaring over Hunga Tonga. Credit: NASA
Frigatebird soaring over Hunga Tonga. Credit: NASA/Dan Slayback
The bird life was particularly active around Hunga Tonga, which appears cut from an exotic island adventure film: mostly sheer cliffs rise up to over 400 feet, facing the black volcanic cone (which you could readily imagine emitting a column of smoke), and draped in thick tropical greenery. At Hunga Tonga’s flat top, which appears entirely inaccessible without climbing gear, tropical trees and palms sway in the wind, while scores of brown boobies, noddys, frigatebirds, and tropicbirds soar and call. With the overhead avian cacophony providing the soundtrack, the scene of a lost tropical paradise juxtaposed against the new, somber and foreboding cone of the crater suggests a primeval landscape from a different age.

– Dan Slayback, Research Scientist with Science Systems and Applications, Inc., at NASA’s Goddard Space Flight Center

 

AuthorEllen Gray
Posted onOctober 21, 2019
TagsTonga
Chasing Caribou Across a Changing Arctic
Katie Orndahl (left) and Rachel Pernick (right) scaling rocky slopes in search of caribou near the Yukon/Northwest Territory border. Photo credit to Aerin Jacob
Katie Orndahl (left) and Rachel Pernick (right) scaling rocky slopes in search of caribou near the Yukon/Northwest Territory border. Photo credit: Aerin Jacob
By Katie Orndahl /YUKON AND NORTHWEST TERRITORIES, CANADA/

I spent my summer searching for arctic spirits: barren-ground caribou who are, somehow, both omnipresent and elusive.

My journey, it turns out, would trace the migration route of the Porcupine caribou herd, linking boreal forest and arctic tundra ecosystems unlike any other northern mammal. The wild landscape I traveled forms the northern extent of the North American Cordillera, one of the last intact mountain ecosystems on Earth.

As I prepared, gathering groceries and loading the truck with scientific equipment and camping supplies, I heard whispers of the entire Porcupine herd moving southeast through the Richardson Mountains. Our small research team drove hurriedly north – hoping for a (figurative) collision course with hundreds of thousands of caribou at the Yukon/Northwest Territories border.

Anticipation ran high, but the border was eerily quiet. A gentle breeze blew and the sun shone through thin clouds. We climbed mountain after mountain, rocks clattering underfoot, to scan the horizon. Looking, hoping, wishing, we even tried to conjure up caribou in our minds to fill the vacant tundra. But the landscape remained still and the disappointment palpable.

We sampled vegetation and drove on.

The Firth River is a formidable obstacle for Porcupine caribou on their yearly migration. Photo credit: Katie Orndahl
The Firth River is a formidable obstacle for Porcupine caribou on their yearly migration. Photo credit: Katie Orndahl
At Imniarvik Base Camp we missed the herd again. Just a few weeks before, the rocky benches above Sheep Creek in Ivvavik National Park had swelled with thousands of caribou. The pulsing mass filled the spaces between spruce trees, blending together first as life personified, and then in death as the roaring Firth River canyon claimed frenzied victims attempting to cross.

Although no longer near, the caribou had made their presence clear – tracks, hair, droppings and browsed willows everywhere we looked. And this, it turns out, was the point. It is hard to be convinced of things we cannot see. As scientists it is our duty to make these things more tangible.

We felt the Porcupine herd’s presence in the things they left behind: tracks, dung, bones, antlers, hair, and signs of browse. Photo credits: Katie Orndahl and Aerin Jacob
We felt the Porcupine herd’s presence in the things they left behind: tracks, dung, bones, antlers, hair, and signs of browse. Photo credits: Katie Orndahl and Aerin Jacob
I am a PhD student at Northern Arizona University. My collaborators and I study how millions of migrating caribou interact with their environment: the habitat selection choices the caribou make, as well as the impacts they impart on the landscape. We are particularly interested in how these interactions fit into a complicated web of processes: climate warming, carbon cycling, wildfire and vegetation change. We hope by including caribou we can “animate the carbon cycle” and fill in gaps in scientific understanding about climate change in the Arctic.

This brought me to the Canadian Arctic.

Fieldwork helps us map above-ground biomass of different types of plants in Alaska and northwest Canada. We identify species of shrubs, flowering plants, lichens and grasses/sedges, estimate the amount of ground they cover, measure their heights, and harvest them to weigh in the laboratory. This gives us closest to true estimates of how much plant matter (caribou food) exists in each place.

However, these measurements are small points on a large landscape. I am particularly excited about new technology that can help us map plant matter (“above-ground biomass”) across the entire region. This means future researchers can choose anywhere on a map and understand how much caribou food exists there. And, what’s more, we can link these maps with GPS data from the movements of collared caribou to understand the relationship between caribou density and on the ground vegetation.

The drone witnessed picked up signs of caribou, too. This drone image shows caribou trails weaving through spruce near Sheep Creek in Ivvavik National Park. Credit: Katie Orndahl
The drone picked up signs of caribou, too. This drone image shows caribou trails weaving through spruce near Sheep Creek in Ivvavik National Park. Credit: Katie Orndahl
For this reason, at each location where we sample vegetation, we also use a drone to collect super high resolution photographs. Not only are these images beautiful, but they also act as a bridge between fine-scale field data and satellite images that cover the whole globe, but contain less detail. We hope drone images might also make future vegetation surveys more efficient.

Using an iPad, Katie (left) and Rachel (right) monitor the drone as it completes its flight in a cottongrass tundra. hoto credit: Aerin Jacob
Using an iPad, Katie (left) and Rachel (right) monitor the drone as it completes its flight in a cottongrass tundra. Photo credit: Aerin Jacob
This summer, we sampled cottongrass tundra as fluffs of wind dispersed seeds floated by, tall willow thickets that bruised our shins and hummed with mosquitoes, and barren ridgelines with little but lichen and resilient dwarf shrubs. Caribou use many different habitats—from the boreal forests of central Alaska to the flat plains of the Yukon North Slope—and our field sites reflect this variety.

At each site, the drone buzzed overhead on a pre-programmed flight, taking detailed photos I’ll use to classify plant cover and create 3D models of vegetation and topography.

Meanwhile, we scurried about on the ground, getting our hands dirty measuring vegetation cover and height, then meticulously harvesting and bagging vegetation.

Katie (left) and Rachel (right) carefully recording vegetation species, cover, and height on line transects. Photo credit: Aerin Jacob
Katie (left) and Rachel (right) carefully recording vegetation species, cover, and height on line transects. Photo credit: Aerin Jacob
Our field sites varied from luscious cottongrass …
Our field sites varied from luscious cottongrass … Photo credit: Katie Orndahl
… to bare rocks and hardy lichen … 
… to bare rocks and hardy lichen … Photo credit: Katie Orndahl
… to thick riverside shrubs
… to thick riverside shrubs. Photo credit: Katie Orndahl
At each site, I thought about caribou.

Eventually, the midnight sun started dipping below the horizon and the arctic summer sputtered out.  As I made the long drive back to Fairbanks, I finally stopped obsessing about finding the caribou. Only then did they appear.

Hundreds of caribou flee pursuing wolves near the Yukon/Northwest Territory border. Photo credit: Laurence Carter
Hundreds of caribou flee pursuing wolves near the Yukon/Northwest Territory border. Photo credit: Laurence Carter
We crawled out of our tents early one morning to see 100 or so caribou nearby. Steaming coffee in hand, our field team watched as the animals we had talked and dreamed about for months grazed peacefully. A sharp intake of breath broke the silence. My colleague pointed into the distance as two small white dots appeared beside the unsuspecting caribou. Moving slowly at first, the wolves broke into a sprint and chased the caribou across the tundra. Kicking up their long legs, the caribou sped away in unison – up a ridge and through a saddle to the other side of the mountains. Defeated, the wolves slowed to a stop and slumped into the grass. This time, caribou won.

Our summer unfolded like a game of hide-and-seek. We found caribou in intricate tracks woven across the landscape, in bits of hair left behind in birch boughs and in willows stripped bare. We found caribou in satiated grizzly bears that gained strength from the unlucky few washed ashore on the Firth River banks. We found caribou in our data which will help us understand how they interact with the changing arctic environment. And finally, we found caribou in the flesh, outrunning two wolves, where the Yukon and Northwest Territories meet.

Rachel (left) and Kayla Arey (right) soak in our first caribou sighting as summer winds down in the Arctic. Photo credit: Laurence Carter
Rachel (left) and Kayla Arey (right) soak in our first caribou sighting as summer winds down in the Arctic. Photo credit: Laurence Carter
AuthorEllen Gray
Posted onOctober 17, 2019
TagsABoVE
A Sea of Islands
The SEA class of 288, Chief Scientist Kerry Whittaker, Chief Anthropologist Emily Hite, and Tongan observer Pen Vailea attend the Free Wesleyan church in Nuku’alofa, Tonga. Credit: SEA
The SEA class of 288, Chief Scientist Kerry Whittaker, Chief Anthropologist Emily Hite, and Tongan observer Pen Vailea attend the Free Wesleyan church in Nuku’alofa, Tonga. Credit: SEA / Emile Hite
By Emily B. Hite /NUKU’ALOFA, TONGA/

Under the moonlight of Friday, October 11, 2019, I eagerly trekked across Hunga Tonga Hunga Ha’apai (HTHH) with a team from Sea Education Association (SEA) and NASA to complete one final mission: to measure temperatures around the perimeter of the volcano’s crater lake. To our delight, our thermal imaging FLIR readings corroborated the hotspots reported earlier by our human temperature probes (students from the class of 288). Discovering the intermittent pockets of sediment that registered over 120°F was the perfect finale to our five-day research expedition on HTHH.

Lesser frigatebird adult feeds juvenile on Hunga Tonga. Credit: SEA / Emily Hite
Lesser frigatebird adult feeds juvenile on Hunga Tonga. Credit: SEA / Emily Hite
As chief anthropologist for Sea Education Association’s Sustainability in Polynesian Island Cultures and Ecosystems (SPICE) program this fall, I facilitate coursework geared towards understanding the diverse and interlinked human-nature relationships throughout our Pacific sailing track. From American Samoa through Tonga and Fiji to New Zealand, we study the dynamic historical, socio-economic, political, and environmental issues that have shaped, and are shaped by, the unique peoples and cultures of the region. At each port stop, students apply their newly acquired ethnographic skills to interview locals and conduct participant observation to answer their proposed research questions. Their projects focus on a range of topics including architecture, religion, tourism, resistance, and conservation in regards to their impacts on people’s sense of place, or connections to landscapes and seascapes, as well as cultural and ecological sustainability. How does one conduct anthropological research on an uninhabited island?

No one lives on HTHH. This is not particularly unique as there are a multitude of uninhabited islands spread throughout the island nations of Oceania. In the Hunga Ha’apai group alone, where HTHH is located, there are 62 islands, and only 17 are inhabited. As Tongan scholar Epeli Hau’ofa so eloquently argued, Oceania is not a region of tiny, dispersed, islands in a vast sea, it is instead a “sea of islands.” This distinction draws attention to the intimately interconnected island spaces that are made into meaningful places by generations of Polynesian seafarers who sailed through them, explored them, lived and thrived in them, and made them into their homes. While uninhabited, these islands are an integral part of the great networks of islands for Oceania people who identify as being of and from the sea.

Arguably then, we can begin to grasp Hau’ofa’s concept as it pertains to HTHH as we conduct our research. SPICE, by nature, is an interdisciplinary program aimed at integrating anthropology with various ecological, geological, and biological sciences. We have been afforded the opportunity, by the King of Tonga none-the-less, to explore the unique features of HTHH. We are attempting to understand natural phenomena and ecological processes in less than a week here; something Polynesians have been doing throughout Oceania for centuries and building societies upon. Fortunately, we were equipped with 26 passionate students eager to literally jump in and conduct research in an ultimate learning experience.

In addition to my role as an anthropologist, I was able to revitalize my previous life as a wildlife biologist. My inner bird nerd was quickly reignited as I lead teams across desert-like (perhaps Mars-like) rocks, gravel, and sediment in search of new or yet to be “discovered” bird species. We easily identified brown boobies (Sula leucogaster), red-footed boobies (Sula sula), red-tailed tropic birds (Phaethon rubricauda), barn owls (Tyto alba), brown noddies (Anous stolidus), and lesser frigatebirds (Fregata ariel). We smelled the colony of 200+ sooty terns (Onychoprion fuscatus) well before we saw it. We passed frigate bird nests with hungry juveniles, screeching in a manner that I can only describe as that of a screaming child in the most terrifying horror film. I followed the horrific sounds and was able to capture the feeding frenzy on camera.

Two Phoenix petrels (Pterodroma alba) flying low near the north east end of HTHH. Crdit: SEA / Emily Hite
Two Phoenix petrels (Pterodroma alba) flying low near the north east end of HTHH. Crdit: SEA / Emily Hite
It took some time studying the bird book to positively ID a solo pacific golden plover (Pluvialis fulva) and a small group of ruddy turnstones (Arenaria interpres). Three elusive song bird species rapidly fluttered from bush to bush allowing for only blurred photos that will need to be examined further. A pigeon and a marsh bird also evaded my arduous attempts at identification. Based on physical features, specifically the distinct pink legs and black webbed toes, I finally determined that the petrels flying overhead were Phoenix Petrels (Pterodroma alba), an endangered species. Not only have some of these species survived the volcanic eruption in 2015, they are now thriving and colonizing the new landmass through natural processes of ecological succession.

I reflected on our research at HTHH as I listened to the melodic Royal Choir heartily sing hymns at the Free Wesleyan church of Tonga on Sunday, October 13. The King and Queen of Tonga sat in their elegant, plush, noble chairs, separated from us by a guarded section in the front of the church. Does the King know it was us, the 20+ foreign visitors in lava lavas sitting attentively in the back pews, who had just completed the collaborative research project on HTHH? Likely he did not notice us at all. However, through our collaborative research and reciprocal data sharing process, he will receive detailed information about all the accomplishments that SEA, NASA, and the Tongan Ministry of the Environment were able to complete on HTHH with his permission.

In five days, we collected over 100 GB of data from drone flights, photographs, geo-surveys, thermal imaging, and ROV surveys of corals. We collected 600 cubic feet of trash off the beaches and disposed it at Nuku’alofa. By all accounts, our mission was a great success. It has been an absolute honor to be involved in this mission along with SEA, NASA, the students, faculty, crew, our Tongan observer, and all our partners at each port stop. Our experiences on HTHH highlighted the interconnected links between peoples, cultures, and environments throughout the Kingdom of Tonga. As we continue our journey navigating through Oceania on the SSV Robert C. Seamans, our experiences at HTHH have made clear that we truly are in a sea of islands.

Emily B. Hite, PhD Candidate, Department of Anthropology, University of Colorado, Boulder

On this expedition to the Kingdom of Tonga, NASA is partnering with the Tongan Ministry of the Environment and the Sea Education Association, an internationally recognized leader in field-based environmental education at sea. This entry is cross-posted from SEA’s blog with permission.

AuthorEllen Gray
Posted onOctober 15, 2019
TagsTonga
An Island of Opportunity
Natalie takes off during swim call, with a view of HTHH in the background. Credit: SEA
Natalie takes off during swim call, with a view of HTHH in the background. Credit: SEA
By Natalia Chiapperi & Carlin Schildge /HUNGA TONGA-HUNGA HA’APAI, KINGDOM OF TONGA/

As we begin to wrap up our time here at HTHH, the data collection slowed down and we found some free time to enjoy the beauty and seclusion of the island. The day started late, with an 8:40 wake-up call, the latest we’ve been able to sleep-in in several weeks. After a fun frittata frenzy (don’t you just love alliteration?) we signed up for shifts of anchor watch on the ship and free time on shore. Half of the students ventured to island in the morning, while the other half took to land in the afternoon. Our watch hung around on the ship for the morning. What was shaping up to be a relaxing morning of reading and card games was made much more exciting with a surprise swim call right before lunch. We climbed to the end of the bowsprit for the first time without our harnesses, and suddenly the way down looked like a much further fall than we initially realized. But with the encouragement of our shipmates, we mustered some courage and took the leap!

Cameron, Grace, and Natalie (left to right) at the rim of the Crater Lake. The Crater Lake and the South Shore of HTHH can be seen behind them. Credit: SEA
Cameron, Grace, and Natalie (left to right) at the rim of the Crater Lake. The Crater Lake and the South Shore of HTHH can be seen behind them. Credit: SEA
After lunch wrapped up, we started the daily shuffle of small boat runs to shore, to swap out students and crew who spent the morning on the island. Once on the rocky black shores, the two of us parted ways to chase our separate adventures. Natalie made the long haul across the north shore to the southwest corner with Grace and Cameron to begin a trek up to the crater rim. The path was an easy one to choose – simply go where the crevices are only 10 feet deep instead of 50, and you’re good to go. The mountain was deceptively small; the trek up wasn’t even the hardest part. The 15-minute climb was nothing compared to the 45-march out to the base of the crater. But it was all worth it once we saw the view from the top. We even saw a whale splashing around Mama Seamans! Oh, and we spotted Carlin journeying across the barren island towards the Crater Lake.

A bright patch of juvenile coral perches on a rock in the waters off Hunga Tonga. Credit: SEA
A bright patch of juvenile coral perches on a rock in the waters off Hunga Tonga. Credit: SEA
Carlin broke off with Eliza and Arielle, and we walked over to Crater Lake to investigate the legendary hot spots. Unfortunately, we were unsuccessful in locating them ourselves, but we had a nice time seeing how far we could sink into the sediment (I almost lost my shoe when, after sitting in sediment up to my thigh, my leg found the surface but my shoe did not). After some light whale watching on the south shore, we made our way back for a snorkel around the northern tip of Hunga Tonga. It was absolutely incredible, and I saw some of the healthiest and most diverse corals I will probably ever see. It was amazing to witness the rebirth of the reef and see how resilient an ecosystem can be when undisturbed by human impacts. Colorful reef fish (and the occasional reef shark) darted from rock to rock, where hundreds of precariously perched baby coral polyps grew out of the ashes of the volcanic eruption. We even saw some massive, old heads of coral, covered in ash, with smaller new polyps growing miraculously over them. It was amazingly hopeful to see the coral reef at the beginning of its life, and it left me with hope for the future of the budding diverse ecosystem.

We really appreciated the opportunity to explore HTHH on our own time today, while still carrying the geological and ecological knowledge we’ve come to acquire over the past few days of research. Data collection was still active across the island, as a team continued vegetation and bird surveys and another surveyed the corals using an ROV. And shout-out to our marine debris team as well, who worked tirelessly today to finish removing as much trash from the island as possible. We finished off this perfect day at HTHH with burgers, a beautiful sunset, and a movie night on deck. Once again feeling grateful for every opportunity this island has provided us. Cheers!

– Natalie Chiapperi, Ithaca College & Carlin Schildge, Colby College, proud members of A Watch!

On this expedition to the Kingdom of Tonga, NASA is partnering with the Tongan Ministry of the Environment and the Sea Education Association, an internationally recognized leader in field-based environmental education at sea. This entry is cross-posted from SEA’s blog with permission.

 

AuthorEllen Gray
Posted onOctober 14, 2019
TagsTonga
Hands-on Research Gets Hot on HTHH, Tonga
Left – Sally and Grace compare surface mud with mud from deeper in the sediment column, while Eva, Katherine, and Olivia look on; Center – Cam holds hot mud up to the camera while Eva looks off camera; Right – Photo of hot mud with stake that is being used to investigate tidal influence within the crater lake. Blue in the thermal camera is not only produced by the cold, but also the underwater areas in the top of the image. Credit: NASA/ Dan Slayback
Thermal images of hot mud. Left – Sally and Grace compare surface mud with mud from deeper in the sediment column, while Eva, Katherine, and Olivia look on; Top right – Cam holds hot mud up to the camera while Eva looks off camera; Bottom right – Photo of hot mud with stake that is being used to investigate tidal influence within the crater lake. Blue in the thermal camera is not only produced by the cold, but also the underwater areas in the top of the image. Credit: NASA/ Dan Slayback
By Cameron Gallant and Katherine H. Webber /HUNGA TONGA-HUNGA HA’APAI, KINGDOM OF TONGA/

KATHERINE: Walking on deck, I welcomed our first sunny day at HTHH; however, upon reaching the island, I was greeted by hot black sand and an all-consuming heat that would last all day. Soon, as a part of the bird/vegetation team, Emily, Arielle, Cam, and I headed towards the southwest corner of the island, which boarders Hunga Ha’apai (which I think looks like a dragon lying down). Its red eye watched over us as we drew near.

CAMERON: The morning was hot, but peaceful. The sound of the waves mixed with the calls of boobies and frigate birds. The vivid green vegetation and reds in the rocks of Hunga Ha’apai set sharply against a bright blue sky and were in crazy contrast to the deep black rocks of HTHH.

KATHERINE: Our team observed a variety of birds, from frigate birds to red tailed tropical birds to a rare red-footed booby! While I was disappointed that we did not see any barn owls, we did discover a mysterious marsh bird, which we will soon identify!

Upon reaching the southwest corner, I was shocked to discover that there was a lot of marine debris scattered along the shore, in the sand and in the grass. Our single large trash bag was not enough to pick up all that we found (shoe soles, plastic bottles, Styrofoam, buoys, long plastic pipes, etc.), so we gathered the trash into piles for a group to collect tomorrow.

Plastic debris collection on HTHH, plastic debris is present on the foreground, with Arielle collecting trash in the background with the cone of HTHH in the distance. Credit: SEA
Plastic debris collection on HTHH. Plastic debris is present on the foreground, with Arielle collecting trash in the background with the cone of HTHH in the distance. Credit: SEA
CAMERON: How can there be shoes in a place where nobody has ever walked? Arielle alone, in about 15 minutes found 14 shoes (all flip flops or sandals), 13 bottles, and two buoys. It’s tough to feel impactful when I know next year more trash will be back. Perhaps HTHH, if it’s picked up each year, can be used as an indicator of the state of ocean bound trash in the area.

KATHERINE: The afternoon was for the crater lake. Watching the still green water emerge from the cover of brown canyons was striking in contrast to the crashing blue and purple surf of HTHH’s southern shore. I had paused between the two bodies of water when I noticed a small wave break not far from shore. I barely had time to alert my companions before a humpback whale breached right before my eyes! You could hear our screams of shock and delight from our ship, the Robert C. Seamans (I’m sure!), and we soon watched her calf breech multiple times, playing in the waves.

CAMERON: Grace thought she felt warm mud yesterday when we did transects to sonar map the bottom of the crater lake. Today, it took us a little while to find the area Grace had stumbled upon and there was some doubt as to if it even existed. Then, there was an excited cry, “I found it! It’s over here!’ Sure enough, as we stood half submerged in the crater lake, our feet sunk through the soft, and uncharacteristically warm mud!

Crater lake group in the water: (left to right) Dan, Adrianna, Eva, Kerry, Jennie, Cameron, Olivia, and Grace standing in the crater lake during hot mud investigation (not pictured: Katherine, Catherine, and Sally). Credit: SEA
Crater lake group in the water: (left to right) Dan, Adrianna, Eva, Kerry, Jennie, Cameron, Olivia, and Grace standing in the crater lake during hot mud investigation (not pictured: Katherine, Catherine, and Sally). Credit: SEA
KATHERINE: I stepped into the cool lake water, surprised as my foot, then ankle, then calf, was submerged until I was knee deep in gravel and mud! Due to a lack of a sediment temperature probe, our chief scientist decided that we would use what we have – our hands, feet, arms, and legs – to conduct our research.

So there we were, wandering knee deep in sediments (waist deep in water), sticking our limbs in and out of the earth, scooping up mud and gravel beneath the sun and clouds. When someone found a hot spot, everyone rushed over (all stumbling with movement hindered) to experience the spa-like sensation. Using a thermal camera, we measured the temperature of the sediment by taking a picture of mud after lifting it out of the water. In
the end, we discovered areas of underwater sediment in our study area (approximately one third of the lake shore) that were hotter than 100°F, with the hottest section at 127°F!

CAMERON:  “I love this mud. It’s not gritty.” I marveled. “Most mud has a certain grit too it.”

“It’s probably ash,” someone replied. Wow. It probably is.

The layering of sediment in the lake was fascinating! There were dark Oreo blacks combined with lighter brown layers to create a roughly inch-and-a-half thick rubbery crust (like firm tofu). This crust sat on top of softer mud mixed with volcanic rocks that provided very little resistance to our feet. Beneath everything was a firm gravely surface that supported our weight. Near one of our hotspots, we found that the sediment was layered in an alternating gravel, mud, gravel, mud fashion.

Throughout the afternoon, we moved along the lake edge and discovered the hot areas were not uniformly around the lake. We hope to feel out the rest of the lake tomorrow. We observed some of the mud has a slight sulfur aroma. The crater lake’s salinity and temperature are also similar to nearby sea water. We set up a temporary stake to monitor the water level to help determine if the lake is tidally influenced. Perhaps there is some
circulation between the lake and the ocean nearby.

KATHERINE: As incredible as the discoveries we are making on this island are, I think it’s important to note that there is nothing like experiencing nature’s wonders firsthand, whether in the splashes of whales or the stateliness of HTHH. So, I encourage all of you to go out and experience your local nature. I hope that you will gain the same appreciation for your natural surroundings as I have for HTHH.

CAMERON: Walking back I just was smiling, trying to wrap my head around the outlandishness of the situation. We spent the afternoon walking around getting muddy in a crater lake and just discovered something nobody in the world knew.

– Katherine H. Webber, B Watch, Best Watch!, The University of Virginia

– Cameron Gallant, A Watch, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill

On this expedition to the Kingdom of Tonga, NASA is partnering with the Tongan Ministry of the Environment and the Sea Education Association, an internationally recognized leader in field-based environmental education at sea. This entry is cross-posted from SEA’s blog with permission.

AuthorEllen Gray
Posted onOctober 11, 2019
TagsTonga
“Another Planet:” Exploring Hunga Tonga-Hunga Ha’apai
Collecting a side-scan sonar transect of the crater lake. The Lowrance is in the foreground, with Cam and Grace towing it in another inflatable raft. The crater wall is also in the background. Credit: SEA
Collecting a side-scan sonar transect of the crater lake. The Lowrance is in the foreground, with Cam and Grace towing it in another inflatable raft. The crater wall is also in the background. Credit: SEA
By Grace Callahan /HUNGA TONGA-HUNGA HA’APAI, KINGDOM OF TONGA/

Hello from the newest land mass on earth! I’m Grace, and today was my first day on Hunga Tonga Hunga Ha’apai. (I spent yesterday on the ship, helping to ensure that our anchor wouldn’t slip and allow us to be blown out to sea.) After breakfast and a community meeting on the quarterdeck, I boarded our small rescue boat and was whisked ashore. The sky was blanketed with clouds that occasionally pelted us with rain, a fact which under normal circumstances would have been disappointing, but the weather made the pitch black sand of the beach more intense and the volcano itself, pitted with deep ravines, all the more striking. As I walked across this otherworldly landscape, it was easy to convince myself that I had stumbled onto another planet. That is until a barn owl swooped past me, shattering this illusion. (We believe these owls are eating the rats we have observed on the island, and there is still so much more to discover about the animals here!)

My first task of the day was to hike to the crater lake on the other side of the tuff cone in order to conduct a plankton net tow and to complete the last of the side-scan sonar transects that will allow us to map the contours of the lake basin. We inflated our two rafts, and paddled across the mint green lake, dragging a very fine mesh net behind us. This gave us a concentrated sample of any organisms larger than 60 microns in the lake. Our water samples from yesterday show that the lake is more acidic than the ocean around it, so it will be fascinating to see what organisms have colonized these waters. We have looked at our net tow sample using our ship microscopes, and so far have identified spindly diatoms and barnacle nauplii (larvae)!

Next up, we fixed a sonar device and GPS to one of the inflatable rafts, and towed that across the lake several times. These transects will hopefully allow us to map the bathymetry of the lake itself! In the process of handling and paddling the rafts, I managed to submerge myself up to my chest several times, and eventually gave up on being completely dry ever again. After all this walking, paddling, and hauling of equipment we were all quite ready to head back to the beach and meet the other research teams for lunch.

The cliffs and surf on the south shore of HTHH. Credit: SEA
The cliffs and surf on the south shore of HTHH. Credit: SEA
After lunch, I joined the geosurvey team on a hunt for geothermal hotspots in the ravines that scar the sides of the volcano. Dan Slayback, who has joined us from NASA for this mission, brought along his heat-sensing thermal imaging camera for this purpose. Though we did not succeed today in finding any hotspots, we had fun exploring the ravines and collecting images of interesting rocks for our geologic catalog. On our way back to our home base, we went around the south shore of the island and marveled at the steep, jet black cliffs above us and the raging surf below. We also saw several baby whales happily showing their tails in the waters just off the coast!

As the rescue boat ferried people back to the Seamans in small groups, I decided to go for a swim. Floating in the water with the magnificent volcano looming in front of me, I thought about coming back tomorrow. Hopefully I will hike to the very top of the crater in order to collect samples that will provide vital clues about the soil microbiome of this brand new island. I also want to pick up more of the plastic trash that litters the island, giving back to this place that has already taught us so much. But for now it’s back to the ship, dry clothes, dinner, and another round of planning before bed. Thank you Hunga Tonga-Hunga Ha’apai for your unearthly beauty and for helping us better understand the workings of our Earth and other planets beyond it. I can’t wait to return.

– Grace Callahan, Wellesley College

On this expedition to the Kingdom of Tonga, NASA is partnering with the Tongan Ministry of the Environment and the Sea Education Association, an internationally recognized leader in field-based environmental education at sea. This entry is cross-posted from SEA’s blog with permission.

AuthorEllen Gray
Posted onOctober 10, 2019
TagsTonga
Early Reports from HTHH, Tonga
Students with the Sea Education Association's SSV Robert C. Seamans after landing on beach of HTHH. Credit: SEA
Students with the Sea Education Association’s SSV Robert C. Seamans after landing on beach of HTHH. Credit: SEA
by Frank Wenninger and Michael Tirone /HUNGA TONGA-HUNGA HA’APAI, KINGDOM OF TONGA/

As we labored down into the zodiac with our gear and rations, the ocean splashed violently around us. Those with hats cowered under the power of the southeasterly winds, and those in the front surrendered to the incessant spraying of the ocean. The 60 HP Yamaha engine roared to life and propelled us to the black sand beachhead on the northeast part of Hunga Tonga-Hunga Ha’apai. On the approach, our coxswain barked disembarking orders and doubled down on the throttle for the landing. The bow of the boat was into the black volcanic sand by the hands of the white foam waves. Following orders, we rolled over our respective sides, plunged into warm Pacific waters, and maintained our hold on the rope that had kept us safe on the journey over. As waves, wind and rain battered us from all sides, we raced to clear the boat of the shoreline. We were eagerly greeted by fellow pioneers who off loaded our gear, and took us to the rendezvous point. Water, sunscreen, and snack; we were here.

As I attempted to free my feet from the soft volcanic sand, my perspective took shape. The black volcanic sand gnawed at my feet as I crawled up the dune where I was met again with the unrelenting southeasterly wind. To my left Hunga Tonga, a 150m high, former island blanketed with vegetation, towered over. On my right, Hunga Ha’apai, also a former island stood in the distance thinly populated with green. Finally, to the center stood the body that bridged the two, a 120m gray volcanic crater. Frigate birds, brown boobies, sooty terns, and thin gray clouds hung over head; tall grasses, trees, coconuts, ferns, hanging vines blow in the wind, and (reported) rats and insects scurry through the brush. Hunga Tonga-Hunga Ha’apai is young, and nature is quickly adapting and exploiting this union.

ank Wenninger paying Respect to Hunga Tonga Hunga Ha'apai, small boats and SSV Robert C. Seamans in the background
Frank Wenninger paying Respect to Hunga Tonga Hunga Ha’apai, small boats and SSV Robert C. Seamans in the background. Credit: SEA
It still is surreal to be on Hunga Tonga-Hunga Ha’apai as the island is only four years old and fewer than 40 people have set their feet on this volcanic island. As some of us have talked to some Tongans while we were in Vava’u, thankfully there weren’t any bad omens or disrespect to their culture for us visiting the island and collecting data unlike other Polynesian islands such as Hawai’i. It is a bad luck to take rocks from the islands of Hawai’i as bad things happen to those that take rocks out of the island. Some people have mailed the rocks back to island in hope to get rid of the bad luck. From where I am from, Guam, it is important to ask for permission from the ancestors to enter certain areas or even to pee in the jungle. Although the people in Vava’u told us there is nothing to worry about, I wanted to pay respect to the island as soon as we got on the shore.

As a Pacific islander, respect is the most important virtue when it comes to every aspect of life. After I did my little prayer on the shore, all the crew got together to pay respect to the island. Soon we were off to complete our mission to help gather data in collaboration with our partners at NASA and with permission granted from the Kingdom of Tonga.

– Frank Wenninger, B Watch, George Washington University

Dan Slayback (right) and Pen Vailea (left) placing down drone/satellite target. 
Pen Vailea (left) and Dan Slayback (right) placing down drone/satellite target. Credit: SEA
There is humanity among this beauty. I was fortunate to work with a team that included Dan Slayback, the NASA scientist who expertly orchestrated S-288’s research and Pen Vailea, our Tongan observer who guided and allowed us to do research on the island. Throughout my first day on the island Pen and Dan spearheaded multiple initiatives. First, we deployed a drone to systematically take photographs of the connecting portion of the island, or crater lake part. The drone flew at 300m in high winds and rain. It completed its mission per Dan. We also installed Tonga Geological Service plaques and satellite targets throughout the island to measure erosion. This group, the drone/installation group, summited and circumnavigated the crater lake, and I painfully ran around the rim looking for a different descent route. Other groups collected human debris throughout the island and others mapped the island’s crater lake. It was a productive first day for exploration, education, and stewardship. I hope we continue to have the opportunity to explore and give back to the island. Onto another day at sea, and on Hunga Tonga-Hunga Ha’apai.

– Michael Tirone, C Watch, Bowdoin College

On this expedition to the Kingdom of Tonga, NASA is partnering with the Tongan Ministry of the Environment and the Sea Education Association, an internationally recognized leader in field-based environmental education at sea. This entry is cross-posted from SEA’s blog with permission.

AuthorEllen Gray
Posted onOctober 9, 2019
TagsTonga
Sailing to Mars via Earth’s Newest Landmass
Intrepid students and SEA assistant scientists deploy the pack rafts and side-scan sonar in the crater lake at HTHH.
Intrepid students and SEA assistant scientists deploy the pack rafts and side-scan sonar in the crater lake at HTHH. Credit: SEA
by Kerry Whittaker, Chief Scientist aboard the SSV Robert C. Seamans / KINGDOM OF TONGA /

On September 27th the SSV Robert C. Seamans departed Pago Pago Harbor, American Samoa, bound for Earth’s newest landmass, located in the Kingdom of Tonga. The ship is a Sea Education Association student sailing and oceanographic vessel with 40 souls on board: student and professional crew, faculty, a visiting scientist from NASA, and an observer from the Tongan Ministry of the Environment. The ship’s destination: a new landmass formed in 2015 in an explosive volcanic eruption. The eruption deposited a pile of ash, pumice, and lava ‘bombs,’ building up a new landmass over the course of a month connecting the two small, uninhabited islands of Hunga Tonga and Hunga Ha’apai.  Perhaps the King of Tonga is scheming up a name for this new landmass, but for now, we’ll refer to it as HTHH.

Sea Education Association has been sailing to remote ocean regions, conducting oceanographic research, and involving students in sail training and scientific exploration for over 40 years.  Our two 134-foot sailing tall-ships are each fully equipped with an oceanographic research laboratory and field sampling technology geared towards studying the chemistry, geology, physics, and biology of the ocean from the surface to deep ocean habitats.  Both ships are designated Sailing School Vessels (SSV), which means that students sail as crew, not as passengers.  The SSV Corwth Cramer operates in the Atlantic Ocean, and the SSV Robert C. Seamans in the Pacific.

Since the formation of HTHH in 2015, NASA has been keenly interested in this landmass as a rare opportunity to examine pathways of land formation and erosion in the time of 21st century remote sensing and scientific technology. HTHH is the first island formed on Earth since the availability of sub-meter resolution satellites including imaging radar and geodetic lidar altimetry. The island has persisted longer than expected, sparking
questions of the erosion dynamics behind its longevity and mechanical stability. NASA’s Mars Exploration Program is most interested in HTHH, as it offers a proxy for understanding important geologic dynamics on the red planet associated with water-based erosion.  One might even consider the island of HTHH “Mars on Earth.”

Map showing the western Pacific with Australia and the Kingdom of Tonga.
Map showing the western Pacific with Australia to the left and the Kingdom of Tonga highlighted in red.
We’ve now arrived here at HTHH, aboard the Robert C. Seamans, which is nimble enough to get close to the island and involve students in this work in collaboration with the Kingdom of Tonga and with our partners at NASA.

As Chief Scientist for the SSV Robert C. Seamans throughout this mission, I have the distinct pleasure of wearing many hats (educator, scientist, shipmate, and my salty blue baseball hat), and facilitating the scientific and educational elements of this work.  As we sailed south from Vava’u, the island emerged from the horizon, otherworldly, wild, and pristine. For months and months, we had planned for this moment. Now, our much-discussed mission fully materialized: a dark grey primordial-looking volcano striped with canyons, dark black saddles leading to green-tufted islands to the East and the West.

We have twenty-six eager college students as integral parts of our scientific mission: to better understand processes of land formation on Earth, so that we might understand it on other planets (e.g. Mars). We’ll conduct our research in partnership with NASA and with the Kingdom of Tonga. As an educator, this experience is a dream.  I’m able to guide students through the process of discovery-to invite them to be scientists, to be stewards of this place, and communicators of our work. To show them the messy, complicated, joyous process of fieldwork. These students are immersed in the pure logistics of it all – of getting people from boat to island (don’t forget the sunblock, the radios, and make sure the datasheets are waterproof!). The need to McGuyver.  The need to open our eyes and question everything we see. I’m not lecturing in front of an undergraduate chemistry bench or over a microscope mimicking the scientific process.  Instead, I’m trudging through tiny volcanic black pebbles through the wind and rain with students trailing behind, wearing bright yellow foulie jackets and rain boots. I can’t help but feel a bit like Miss Frizzle.

We’re headed to the island’s crater lake to map its depth and shape for the first time using pack rafts and a portable sonar device. We’ve wound up and through the canyons lining the volcano’s steep walls, loose volcanic ash towering 30-50 feet above us, documenting and hypothesizing about the rocks and a suspicious white ooze coming from a distinct layer between ash and chunks of basalt.  We’re asking questions, using the human tools of our eyes and senses. We’re collecting data that might help to answer those questions with equipment we’ve personally lugged through force 6 winds in five or so small boat runs back and forth from island to ship throughout the morning. The equipment includes an ROV, two drones, highly sensitive GPS devices, datasheets, trash bags, sonar equipment and pack rafts, all to be deployed by student teams throughout the day, all to be trudged through the tiny black pebbles to the crater lake, the crater rim, the raucous wind-exposed south side beach, and the island’s saddles.  Tomorrow, we’ll test the newest rumor yet (although currently unsubstantiated) – Grace stuck her feet deep in the silt at the crater lake, and it was WARM down there. We’re picking up marine debris (because yes, of course, despite being the newest landmass on Earth, HTHH is covered with plastic trash).

The greatest delight for me, beyond the science and the adventure, is inviting students to engage as integral members in this scientific (and very human) process of discovery.  I am so excited to share this experience on HTHH with this eager group of SEA students.  I’m thrilled to be collaborating with NASA, our visiting scientist Dan Slayback, and our Tongan observer and partners in the Tongan Ministry of the Environment. I’m so fortunate to be working alongside an amazing team of professional crew (assistant scientists, engineers, steward, and mates) sailing aboard the SSV Robert C. Seamans, without whom this work would not be possible.  I’m also endlessly grateful to my co-faculty, Captain and Chief Anthropologist, aboard as masters of our educational and sailing program.  And we’re excited to share our experience with you! Please follow along for the next few days as we accomplish this most exciting mission here at HTHH, Mars on Earth.

On this expedition to the Kingdom of Tonga, NASA is partnering with the Tongan Ministry of the Environment and the Sea Education Association, an internationally recognized leader in field-based environmental education at sea. This entry is cross-posted from SEA’s blog with permission.'

For all of the apparent hardness of their skeletons, corals are rather fragile. Corals thrive under very specific conditions; in particular, they grow best within a small window of temperatures. If the water gets too hot or too cold, corals start to bleach and sometimes die.

The past two years have been the two hottest in the global temperature record, and coral reefs around the world are suffering because of it. The potent El Niño has amplified the problem. As a result, national and international science agencies have declared one of the worst global coral bleaching events on record.

“We are currently experiencing the longest global coral bleaching event ever observed,” said Mark Eakin, coordinator of NOAA’s Coral Reef Watch, in a February 2016 statement. “We may be looking at a 2- to 2.5-year-long event. Some areas have already seen bleaching two years in a row.”

Bleaching occurs when the algae that live inside corals (and give them some of their colors) are expelled due to stress, such as higher-than-normal water temperatures or pollution. The loss of the algae means the loss of a food source for the corals. Under extreme bleaching, corals become more susceptible to disease. Bleaching does not necessarily mean death for a reef, but it can often lead to it.

The images above and below are maps of sea surface temperature anomalies (SSTAs) in various regions over the past year. The maps do not depict absolute temperatures; instead, they show how much water temperatures were above (red) or below (blue) the long-term average for the same months from 2003 to 2012. Gray areas are too close to land and coastal shallows for a clear signal in this data set.

The map at the top of this page shows sea surface temperature anomalies for the southwestern Pacific Ocean for February and March 2016. The map below depicts equatorial Atlantic, Caribbean, and Pacific waters around the Americas in October and November 2015. The final map is a global view of SSTAs from November 2015 through February 2016, the peak of this winter’s El Niño.


The maps were built with data from the Microwave Optimally Interpolated SST product, a NASA-supported effort at Remote Sensing Systems. The research team combines measurements from the U.S. Navy’s WindSAT instrument on the Coriolis satellite and the AMSR2 instrument on Japan’s GCOM-W. The sensors observe emissions of microwaves and infrared light from the sea surface, capturing the temperature of the top few millimeters of the water.

Temperatures on these maps show above-average readings, but do not necessarily look extreme in the areas around the reefs. But keep in mind that corals are sensitive to relatively minor changes in temperature. Researchers from NOAA also point out that sustained heat stress over a long period of time—weeks to months—is more damaging than brief, extreme events.

Researchers from Australia’s Coral Bleaching Taskforce have reported that nearly 93 percent of the Great Barrier Reef has been affected in some way by the bleaching event. Temperatures around the reef most recently peaked in February and March 2016. After conducting aerial and in-water surveys, scientists observed that 81 percent of the reefs between Cairns, Australia, and Papua-New Guinea have been severely bleached, with another 18 percent partially bleached. Some reports suggest 50 percent of the corals might be dead already. Along the central latitudes of the reef system, 33 percent of the reefs were severely bleached, with another 56 partly affected. In the southernmost reaches, 1 percent was severely bleached and 74 percent had some level of distress. The central and southern portions were actually aided a bit by Cyclone Winston. The severe storm churned up enough cold water to reduce surface water temperatures and moderate the bleaching.

In the Caribbean and the reefs of the Florida Keys, bleaching events were most severe in the fall of 2015. Reefs around the Hawaiian Islands, Fiji, and other Pacific islands have been severely stressed and bleached. With 2016 global temperatures already setting records, there is concern that bleaching could occur again in 2016.

One of Australia’s most important natural assets, the Great Barrier Reef (GBR), is being affected by the worst ever bleaching in its history, amid warmer than average water temperatures associated with this summer’s major El Niño event and against a background trend of ongoing ocean warming.

With extensive coral bleaching having been predicted as far back as October last year, Terry Hughes at the ARC Centre of Excellence for Coral Reef Studies convened the National Coral Bleaching Taskforce to document the bleaching, both from the air and at close quarters.

With our survey work still ongoing, a bleak picture is emerging: more than 1,000 km of the Great Barrier Reef shows signs of significant bleaching. In the worst-affected areas, in the GBR’s previously pristine far north, many corals are now expected to die.


Bleaching, such as on this anemone, is worst in the Great Barrier Reef’s remote north. CoralWatch.org, Author provided
Warning signs
At the start of southern summer it was predicted that bleaching would be largely restricted to central and southern parts of the GBR. As it turns out, the first indications of a problem came from scientists working at Lizard Island, in the reef’s remote north. In January, Jodie Rummer of the ARC Centre of Excellence for Coral Reef Studies was studying fish near the island when she noticed that many of the hard corals, soft corals and even clams were starting to bleach.

Shortly thereafter, staff from the Great Barrier Reef Marine Park Authority, undertaking routine surveys in the northern GBR, reported that not only were many of the corals bleached on reefs near Cooktown, but some of the corals had already started dying.

The full extent and severity of the bleaching in the northern GBR became apparent when our colleague Terry Hughes led a team on a series of aerial surveys, similar to those carried out during the 1998 and 2002 GBR bleaching events.


It was expected that these surveys would show that bleaching was restricted to the reefs at and around Lizard Island. But detailed aerial assessments of bleaching severity at 500 reefs have instead shown that 95% of reefs stretching between Cairns and Papua New Guinea have experienced significant coral bleaching. Only four reefs showed no evidence of bleaching.

How do the surveys work?
During aerial surveys, each reef is given a score from 0, indicating no bleaching, to 4, indicating that more than 60% of the corals are bleached. Comparing the results of the latest aerial surveys to those from previous bleaching episodes, it is clear that this bleaching event is far worse.

In 1998 and 2002, fewer than 200 reefs were assigned to the highest bleaching categories (3 or 4), compared with 450 already this year. Moreover, aerial surveys are now continuing on reefs south of Cairns, where bleaching is also being reported.

Extensive aerial surveys are being complemented by in-water surveys by coral biologists. By getting in the water, scientists are better able to ascertain the severity of the bleaching, establish which types of corals have been worst affected, and make predictions about what proportion of the bleached corals are likely to die. The trade-off is that they cannot cover as many locations as an aerial survey.

In places where both aerial and in-water surveys have been conducted, the results match very closely. Near Port Douglas, for example, where aerial surveys revealed many reefs had a score of 4 (greater than 60% bleaching), divers have confirmed that at least 75% of the corals on the shallow reef top are bleached. Similarly, reefs in this region that scored only 2 or 3 from the air show corresponding levels of bleaching in in-water surveys.

The overall pattern
While bleaching surveys are ongoing, a distinct pattern is emerging, whereby the severity of bleaching declines from north to south. Virtually all of the reefs in the GBR’s remote far northern section have been hit very hard. Here, virtually all of the corals, including normally very robust types, are bleached.

Given the severity of the bleaching, we expect that many of the corals in this region will die. This is concerning, given that the GBR’s north was considered “most pristine” in the latest Great Barrier Reef Outlook Report.


Bleached coral near Port Douglas. Cassandra Thompson/ARC Centre of Excellence for Coral Reef Studies, Author provided
Between Cooktown and Cairns – an area of the reef that is particularly important for tourism – the bleaching is much more variable. There are certainly some reefs where up to 90% of the corals are bleached and death rates are expected to be very high. But the extent of bleaching at other nearby reefs is much more moderate, enabling tourists to visit reefs that are still in good condition.

Further south, the extent of bleaching is even more variable and generally less severe. Ironically, the weather disturbance that persisted from Tropical Cyclone Winston, which devastated Fiji in February, helped to cool surface waters over the central and southern GBR, reducing the heat stress suffered by these corals.

Work is continuing to establish the southernmost extent of significant bleaching, but it is clear that a very large stretch (more than 1,000 km) of the GBR has been affected.

While the full extent of the bleaching, as well as the social, ecological and economic impacts, are yet to become apparent, this is undoubtedly the worst known bleaching event on the GBR. The National Coral Bleaching Taskforce will continue to coordinate research throughout 2016 to get a more complete picture of the severity and consequences of this event. The Taskforce is also currently monitoring thermal conditions on Western Australian reefs, which are now at their most critical time for bleaching to occur.

The widespread bleaching event occurring across the Great Barrier Reef is unprecedented in scale and severity. It has rightly gained global media attention. Sadly, however, some of the headlines it has generated are factually incorrect or misleading:

Half of Great Barrier Reef “dead or dying” (ITV News)

Coral are bleaching along the entire Great Barrier Reef (Ars Technica)

Climate change has destroyed 93% of the Great Barrier Reef (RedOrbit)

The aerial surveys
Most of the recent international coverage was based on a press release from the ARC Centre for Coral Reef Studies at James Cook University. It explained how comprehensive aerial surveys were undertaken on “911 individual reefs … along the full 2,300 km length of the Great Barrier Reef. Of all the reefs we surveyed, only 7% (68 reefs) have escaped bleaching entirely”

The ARC survey assessed nearly one-third of all of the coral reefs on the Great Barrier Reef – a huge sample, analogous to polling 8 million Australians to find out their voting intentions. Underwater teams of scientific divers have confirmed the accuracy of these aerial surveys and are continuing to measure the ongoing impact of the bleaching.

The map below highlights the differences in bleaching patterns between the reef’s northern and southern sections.


Results of aerial surveys along the length of the Great Barrier Reef. ARC Centre of Excellence for Coral Reef Studies
It is important to recognise that if bleaching was observed on a reef, this does not mean a particular reef has entirely bleached. Indeed, 45% of the reefs assessed had 30% or less bleaching. In the southern section, only 1% of reefs were categorised as “severely bleached”.

Make no mistake: what is happening is very serious. But to state that “climate change has destroyed 93% of the Great Barrier Reef” is a misrepresentation of the situation.

Perhaps the more accurate way to frame the results (and indeed the wording used in the media release) is to say that only 7% of the coral reefs across the Great Barrier Reef have completely avoided bleaching. The situation is bad enough even when sticking to the facts.

There is clear evidence of the extent and severity of the bleaching, which supports the conclusion that the reef is experiencing the worst bleaching event ever seen. The northern half has been hit the hardest, with about 80% categorised as severely bleached.


The exact extent of bleaching varies from reef to reef. Chris Jones
The context
Part of the problem is that while many people around the world have heard of the Great Barrier Reef, few know enough about it to put such confronting headlines into context. For instance, it is important to understand the extent to which coral reefs form part of the much larger World Heritage Area.

Most of the articles accompanying the above headlines don’t clarify the following key points:

the World Heritage Area is the size of Italy or Malaysia, but only around 10% of this area is comprised of coral reefs.

more than 3,000 separate coral reefs collectively comprise the Great Barrier Reef, and these extend north into the Torres Strait, outside the boundaries of both the GBR Marine Park and the World Heritage Area.

the surveys show a mixed picture of very severe, moderate and little bleaching that changes dramatically from north to south along the 2,300 km length of the reef.

a bleached coral is not necessarily a dead coral, and the true extent of dead coral across the Great Barrier Reef will only become clear over the coming months.

while coral reefs are a key component of the ecosystem, they are not the only habitats suffering from the impacts of climate change.


Anemones have been bleaching too. Justin Marshall/CoralWatch
Tourism in damage control
At the other end of the scale, some tourism operators and politicians have questioned the impacts of the bleaching, claiming that the effects are overstated.

This has given rise to a social media campaign involving pictures of healthy corals posted under the #GBRtoday hashtag, and has generated headlines such as:

Tourism industry pushes back against bleaching claims (Radio 4CA)

Tourism officials not panicking about coral bleaching on Far North Queensland reefs (Cairns Post)

An independent survey by tour operators using federal funding was co-ordinated by the Reef and Rainforest Research Centre (RRRC) in Cairns. This involved 402 surveys on reefs between Cairns and the northern Ribbon Reefs. It found 31% of their survey sites had not bleached, with the remaining 69% of the surveys showing varying levels of bleaching.

At 16 of the RRRC survey sites, 85% or more of the surveyed area was bleached to varying extents, ranging from moderate bleaching to coral death (bleaching levels 2-4, see page 8 of the report for more details).

At several of the Ribbon Reefs, between 30-40% of the corals at the surveyed site were dead. These results are not dissimilar to those of the ARC scientists.

The real picture
In summary, the level of bleaching of the coral reefs is catastrophic in the northern sector. Along the length of the Great Barrier Reef from north to south, there is a gradient of decreasing severity, from very severe to no sign of bleaching.

The magnitude of this bleaching, the worst ever to hit the reef, cannot be overstated. This is a massive blow to the UNESCO World Heritage site considered to be the most biodiverse on the planet.

Experts are predicting high levels of coral death across some parts of the Great Barrier Reef. Close to 50% mortality of bleached corals has already been measured north of Port Douglas. However, the wider impacts on the Great Barrier Reef ecosystem, and on the industries and communities that depend on a healthy reef, will not be fully apparent for months.

The Great Barrier Reef, located off the northeast tip of Australia, is one of the natural wonders of the world. In addition to providing vast ecological benefits, the Great Barrier Reef also is a tourist hotspot for Australia. It’s worth $5 billion annually and employs close to 70,000 people.  And it has had a bad year. A long stretch of weeks with unusually warm waters, partly linked to El Niño, have led to heat stress and widespread bleaching across the 2,300-kilometer-length of the Great Barrier Reef.

Great Barrier Reef, Coral, location, Australia
Location of the Great Barrier Reef off of northeastern Australia. Climate.gov image based on data from NOAA Environmental Visualization Lab. 

Coral bleaching refers to the process where heat-stressed corals expel the colorful algae that usually live within their tissues. When water temperatures increase, though, the coral turns into an angry landlord, ejecting their beneficial tenants. After the loss of their beneficial algae, the corals turn completely white. The problem? Those tenants make almost all of the corals’ food. If the algae are expelled and do not return, the corals will starve and die.


Compared to healthy coral, which appear in shades of purple and gold, bleached coral on the Great Barrier Reef appear bone white. Photo by Mia Hoogenboom, for ARC Centre of Excellence for Coral Reef Studies.

The current bleaching event is being widely described as the worst ever recorded along the Great Barrier Reef. Based on updates from Australian scientists on April 20, 2016, 93% of the reefs surveyed showed at least some bleaching. Of 900 reefs that scientists observed during a flyover, only 68 had escaped bleaching. Between 60 to 100% of corals on 316 reefs were described as severely bleached, almost all in the north.

Historically, the northern reefs—the most remote—have been the most pristine and the least degraded, both by humans and by past bleaching events. During this event, 81% of reefs in the north had severely bleached. The central reefs were 33% severely bleached, while reefs in the southern section were only 1% severely bleached, with a quarter not bleached at all.


A compilation of aerial and underwater video showing bleaching on Australia's Great Barrier Reef in April 2016. Video provided by the ARC Centre of Excellence for Coral Reef Studies.

Coral bleaching does not immediately kill corals. They do have the potential to recover if temperatures drop back below stressful levels and remain there for a long period of time—with no new shocks. This would allow surviving algae to reproduce and re-colonize the corals. But, as reported in the Washington Post, diving surveys of reefs in the north have shown close to 50% coral death already.

Coral stress does not just depend on how high water temperatures are, but also how long sea surface temperatures remain above average. Sea surface temperatures along the Reef since February have been 1-4°F (1-2°C) above average, exceeding 86°F across the most severely impacted areas in the north.


Accumulated weeks of heat stress for the waters surrounding Australia, including the Great Barrier Reef, during the week of March 28–April 3, 2016. Values larger than 4 (gold to orange) indicate that widespread coral bleaching is likely. Values above 8 (salmon to dark pink) indicate that significant bleaching and death is possible. During this period, elevated values of degree heating weeks are present across the northern section of the Great Barrier Reef, a historically pristine and unimpacted section of the reef. Severe bleaching across this region has taken place. Climate.gov image, based on imagery provided by provided by NOAA's Environmental Visualization Lab. Original data from NOAA's Coral Reef Watch project.

One way NOAA scientists track the buildup of coral heat stress is with satellite maps of degree heating weeks. During the week spanning the end of March and beginning of April, degree heating week values were high, showing long-lasting heat stress across the central and northern sectors of the reef. This is consistent with where the most severely bleached reefs were found.  

The warmth associated with El Niño (the warm phase of a natural climate pattern that swings back and forth in the tropical Pacific) was a major contributor to this record-breaking bleaching event on the Great Barrier Reef, but long-term warming trend in the oceans worldwide due to human-caused climate change is the underlying cause.

Stay tuned for a follow-up post in the next week or two that explores this event in more detail and talks about the future of the Great Barrier Reef in the face of continued global warming. 
The devastation of coral at Australia's iconic Great Barrier Reef (GBR) "dwarfs previous bleaching events by a long mark," says Terry Hughes, director of the Australian Research Council Centre of Excellence for Coral Reef Studies in Townsville. Over the weekend, Hughes and colleagues completed the final of a series of aerial surveys crisscrossing the entire reef system. Bleaching is most severe, they confirmed, along the northernmost 1000 kilometers of the reef.

Bleaching occurs when overly warm water leads corals to expel symbiotic algae called zooxanthellae. Without the colorful algae, which use photosynthesis to produce nutrients for themselves and their hosts, the corals turn white, or bleach. If the waters cool soon enough, algae return; if bleaching persists, the corals die. The world is in the midst of an unusually long El Niño, the climate phenomenon that warms water in the equatorial Pacific and affects global weather. The El Niño, abetted by global warming, has been pushing reefs worldwide into the danger zone.


NASA
The prolonged ocean warming has hit the GBR hard. Only 7% of the reef system has avoided coral bleaching entirely, according to a statement released today by Australia’s National Coral Bleaching Taskforce. The aerial survey found that middle stretches of the 2300-kilometer-long GBR system were, on the whole, moderately bleached. Only the southern reaches escaped with minimal damage, thanks to persistent cloud cover and rain in early March. The middle and southern sections will likely recover and regain color in coming months, says Hughes, who heads the taskforce. The northern section is in big trouble: Eighty percent of the reefs were severely bleached and in-water surveys have confirmed 50% mortality in some reefs, a percentage that could eventually exceed 90%.

Recovering from this degree of devastation will take decades, and even then the reef will be only a shadow of its prebleaching self. At best, in a decade or two, coral cover will be dominated by fast-growing species, without any of the 200-year-old corals that have perished recently, Hughes says. The northern GBR "won't get back to what it was, certainly not in my lifetime," he says. 

There is more bad news. Up to 80% of coral reefs on the western coast of Australia are now also bleached, according to the taskforce. 

The Great Barrier Reef is the world’s largest reef structure, supporting a huge array of marine life off the coast of Queensland, Australia. The reef’s designation as a marine park helps protect it from some human pressures, such as local water pollution and overfishing. But park protection cannot prevent the heating of ocean water—the main stressor on this coral system and the reason for its bleaching.

The bright colors (and food source) of healthy coral come from the microscopic algae that live inside coral tissues. But the symbiotic relationship is compromised when the water gets too hot. Warm temperatures drive out the algae, and corals turn a pale white—the so-called bleaching that leaves corals vulnerable to disease and death. Fortunately, scientists have ways to monitor the reef. And they can do so remotely.

The map above, based on data from NOAA’s Coral Reef Watch, shows areas with varying levels of heat stress. The amount of heat stress is an indicator of bleaching and its potential intensity. This map shows the maximum stress reached during the seven-day period from February 21-27, 2017. Tan indicates a bleaching watch, meaning that the area may have been exposed to heat stress. Orange indicates a bleaching warning, meaning that bleaching is possible. Red indicates a bleaching alert level 1 (bleaching is likely), and dark red indicates alert level 2 (mortality is likely).

Coral Reef Watch produces maps like this for ocean areas around the world. The level of stress is based on measurements of sea surface temperature, which is derived from multiple satellites including Suomi NPP. But to figure out when conditions are deviating from normal, scientists first had to define normal. Defining this “climatology” is where the Pleiades supercomputer at NASA’s Ames Research Center contributed.

As the map shows, many areas in late February were far from normal; some level of heat stress was present almost everywhere in the waters east of Australia. According to Mark Eakin, coordinator of Coral Reef Watch, the current bleaching on the Great Barrier Reef is part of a global bleaching event that started in June 2014 and has been ongoing. It is the third global coral bleaching event since the 1980s.

“Unlike past global bleaching events (in 1998 and 2010) that lasted less than twelve months, this event is in its 33rd month and shows no sign of stopping,” Eakin said. “It has been the longest, most widespread, and most damaging coral bleaching event ever recorded.”

The reef appears small on this map, and even smaller on global maps. But providing data only over reefs would exclude the bigger picture. “The conditions in surrounding ocean waters is very informative when trying to understand what is and may soon be happening on reefs,” Eakin said.

Scientists are making progress in gaining that understanding thanks to a combination of this satellite-derived information and some recent aerial and underwater surveys of the Great Barrier Reef. In new findings published in Nature on March 15, 2017, researchers showed that severe heat stress and bleaching spanned the northern 1,000 kilometers of the Great Barrier Reef during the severe bleaching of 2016. In contrast, earlier events in 1998 and 2002 severely bleached the reef farther south. At one time or another, bleaching has affected almost the entire span of the reef.

The ARC Centre of Excellence for Coral Reef Studies noted in a statement about the new study: “Coral bleaching events should no longer be thought of as individual disturbances to reefs, but as recurring events that threaten the viability of coral reefs globally.”

Coral researchers are remobilising to conduct aerial and underwater surveys along the Great Barrier Reef and elsewhere in Australia as coral bleaching reappears for the second year in a row. The decision coincides with the release today of a study in the prestigious journal Nature warning the Reef’s resilience is rapidly waning.

Scientists and Reef managers from ten research institutions across Australia, representing the National Coral Bleaching Taskforce, have returned to the Reef only one year after scorching temperatures caused the worst coral bleaching event on record in 2016. Teams will spend the next few weeks in the air and underwater measuring the extent of the damage from this summer compared to last.

“We’re hoping that the next 2-3 weeks will cool off quickly, and this year’s bleaching won’t be anything like last year. The severity of the 2016 bleaching was off the chart,” explains lead author and Taskforce convener, Prof. Terry Hughes (ARC Centre of Excellence for Coral Reef Studies). “It was the third major bleaching to affect the Great Barrier Reef, following earlier heatwaves in 1998 and 2002. Now we’re gearing up to study a potential number four.”

“We have now assessed whether past exposure to bleaching in 1998 and 2002 made reefs any more tolerant in 2016. Sadly, we found no evidence that past bleaching makes the corals any tougher.”

While protecting reefs from fishing, and improving water quality is likely to help bleached reefs recover in the longer term, the study also revealed that it made no difference to the amount of bleaching during the extreme heatwave of 2016.



 

Co-author Dr Janice Lough, Senior Principal Research Scientist at the Australian Institute of Marine Science says, “average sea-surface temperatures for the Australian summer 2016 were the highest ever recorded on the Great Barrier Reef. In each of the three events since 1998, the pattern of bleaching matches exactly where the warmest water was each year. That allows us to predict when and where bleaching is likely to occur this year.”

Global warming is the number one threat to the Reef.  The bleaching in 2016 strongly reinforces the urgent need to limit climate change as agreed by world leaders in the Paris Agreement, and fully implement the Reef 2050 Plan to boost the Reef’s resilience,” says co-author Dr David Wachenfeld from the Great Barrier Reef Marine Park Authority.

“It broke my heart to see so many corals dying on northern reefs on the Great Barrier Reef in 2016,” says Prof. Hughes, who led the expansive aerial surveys. “With rising temperatures due to global warming, it’s only a matter of time before we see more of these events. A fourth event after only one year is a major blow to the Reef”.

During 2015–2016, record temperatures triggered a pan-tropical episode of coral bleaching, the third global-scale event since mass bleaching was first documented in the 1980s. Here we examine how and why the severity of recurrent major bleaching events has varied at multiple scales, using aerial and underwater surveys of Australian reefs combined with satellite-derived sea surface temperatures. The distinctive geographic footprints of recurrent bleaching on the Great Barrier Reef in 1998, 2002 and 2016 were determined by the spatial pattern of sea temperatures in each year. Water quality and fishing pressure had minimal effect on the unprecedented bleaching in 2016, suggesting that local protection of reefs affords little or no resistance to extreme heat. Similarly, past exposure to bleaching in 1998 and 2002 did not lessen the severity of bleaching in 2016. Consequently, immediate global action to curb future warming is essential to secure a future for coral reefs.

Main
The world’s tropical reef ecosystems, and the people who depend on them, are increasingly affected by climate change1,2,3,4,5,6,7. Since the 1980s, rising sea surface temperatures owing to global warming have triggered unprecedented mass bleaching of corals, including three pan-tropical events in 1998, 2010 and 2015/16 (ref. 1). Thermal stress during marine heatwaves disrupts the symbiotic relationship between corals and their algal symbionts (Symbiodinium spp.), causing the corals to lose their colour2,3. Bleached corals are physiologically damaged, and prolonged bleaching often leads to high levels of coral mortality5,6,7,8. Increasingly, individual reefs are experiencing multiple bouts of bleaching, as well as the effects of more chronic local stressors such as pollution and overfishing1,2,3,4. Our study represents a fundamental shift away from viewing bleaching events as individual disturbances to reefs, by focusing on three recurrent bleachings over the past 18 years along the 2,300 km length of the Great Barrier Reef, as well as the potential influence of water quality and fishing pressure on the severity of bleaching.

The geographic footprints of mass bleaching of corals on the Great Barrier Reef have varied markedly during three major events in 1998, 2002 and 2016 (Fig. 1a). In 1998, bleaching was primarily coastal and most severe in the central and southern regions. In 2002, bleaching was more widespread, and affected offshore reefs in the central region that had escaped in 1998 (ref. 8). In 2016, bleaching was even more extensive and much more severe, especially in the northern regions, and to a lesser extent the central regions, where many coastal, mid-shelf and offshore reefs were affected (Fig. 1a, b). In 2016, the proportion of reefs experiencing extreme bleaching (>60% of corals bleached) was over four times higher compared to 1998 or 2002 (Fig. 1f). Conversely, in 2016, only 8.9% of 1,156 surveyed reefs escaped with no bleaching, compared to 42.4% of 631 reefs in 2002 and 44.7% of 638 in 1998. The cumulative, combined footprint of all three major bleaching events now covers almost the entire Great Barrier Reef Marine Park, with the exception of southern, offshore reefs (Fig. 1d).

Figure 1: Geographic extent and severity of recurrent coral bleaching at a regional scale, Australia.
figure1
a, The footprint of bleaching on the Great Barrier Reef in 1998, 2002 and 2016, measured by extensive aerial surveys: dark green (<1% of corals bleached), light green (1–10%), yellow (10–30%), orange (30–60%), red (>60%). The number of reefs surveyed in each year was 638 (1998), 631 (2002), and 1,156 (2016). b, Spatial pattern of heat stress (DHWs; °C-weeks) during each mass-bleaching event. Dark blue indicates 0 DHW, and red is the maximum DHW for each year (7, 10 and 16, respectively). Orange and yellow indicate intermediate levels of heat exposure on a continuous scale. c, Frequency distribution of maximum DHWs on the Great Barrier Reef, in 1998, 2002 and 2016. White bars indicate 0–4 °C-weeks; grey bars, 4–8 °C-weeks; black bars, >8 °C-weeks. d, Locations of individual reefs that bleached (by >10% or more) in 1998, 2002 and/or 2016, showing the most severe bleaching score for reefs that were surveyed more than once. Yellow, 10–30% bleaching; orange, 30–60%; red, >60%. e, Location of reefs that were surveyed in all three years that bleached zero (white), one (light grey), two (dark grey) or three times (black). f, Frequency distribution of aerial bleaching scores for reefs surveyed in 1998 (left bars), 2002 (middle), and 2016 (right bars). Colour bleaching scores as in a. g, Bleaching severity during March to early April 2016 on both sides of Australia, including the Coral Sea and the eastern Indian Ocean. Colour bleaching scores as in a. Bar graphs show mean sea surface temperatures during March for each year from 1980 to 2016 for northern and southern latitudes on either side of Australia. The red bar highlights the north–south disparity in 2016. Map templates provided by Geoscience Australia under licence from Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International Licence.

PowerPoint slide

Full size image
Explaining spatial patterns
The severity and distinctive geographic footprints of bleaching in each of the three years can be explained by differences in the magnitude and spatial distribution of sea surface temperature anomalies (Fig. 1a, b and Extended Data Table 1). In each year, 61–63% of reefs experienced four or more degree heating weeks (DHWs; °C-weeks). In 1998, heat stress was relatively constrained, ranging from 1–8 DHWs (Fig. 1c). In 2002, the distribution of DHWs was broader, and 14% of reefs encountered 8–10 DHWs. In 2016, the spectrum of DHWs expanded further still, with 31% of reefs experiencing 8–16 DHWs (Fig. 1c). The largest heat stress occurred in the northern 1,000-km-long section of the Great Barrier Reef. Consequently, the geographic pattern of severe bleaching in 2016 matched the strong north–south gradient in heat stress. By contrast, in 1998 and 2002, heat stress extremes and severe bleaching were both prominent further south (Fig. 1a, b). In 2016, severe bleaching (defined as an aerial score of >30% of corals bleached) was correctly predicted by satellite-derived DHWs in a statistical model, in 75% of cases (Extended Data Fig. 1 and Extended Data Table 1), similar to the amount of spatial variation in bleaching explained by temperature stress in 1998 and 2002 (ref. 8).

The geographic pattern of bleaching also demonstrates how marine heatwaves can be ameliorated by local weather9, even during a global bleaching event. Arguably, southern reefs of the Great Barrier Reef would also have bleached in 2016 if wind, cloud cover and rain from ex-tropical cyclone Winston had not rescued them10. Winston passed over Fiji on February 20th, when the southern Great Barrier Reef was only 1 °C cooler than the north. By March 6th, this disparity increased to 4 °C (Extended Data Fig. 2). Corals in the south that had begun to pale in February regained their colour in the south in March, whereas bleaching continued to progress in central and northern sectors (Fig. 2a). Similarly, in western Australia in 2016, tropical cyclone Stan cooled down mid-coast regions in early February11, and the Leeuwin Current (which transports warm tropical water southwards) was also weakened due to El Niño conditions12. Consequently, both sides of tropical and sub-tropical Australia, including offshore atolls in the Coral Sea and Indian Ocean, exhibited continental-scale latitudinal gradients in bleaching (Fig. 1g).

Figure 2: Recurrent severe coral bleaching.
figure2
a, Aerial view of severe bleaching in Princess Charlotte Bay, northeast Australia, March 2016. Close to 100% of corals are bleached on the reef flat and crest. Bleaching occurs when algal symbionts (Symbiodinium spp.) in a coral host are killed by environmental stress, revealing the white underlying skeleton of the coral. b, Severe bleaching in 2016 on the northern Great Barrier Reef affected even the largest and oldest corals, such as this slow-growing Porites colony. c, Large, old beds of clonal staghorn corals, Acropora pulchra, on Orpheus Island, Queensland photographed in 1997 were killed by the first major bleaching event on the Great Barrier Reef in 1998. d, Eighteen years later in May 2016, corals at this site have never recovered, with the original assemblages still visible as dead, unconsolidated and muddy rubble that is unsuitable for successful colonization by coral larvae. e, f, Mature stands of clonal staghorn corals were extirpated by heat stress and colonized by algae over a period of just a few weeks in 2016 on Lizard Island, Great Barrier Reef. Before (e) and after (f) photographs were taken on 26 February and 19 April 2016. Photo credits: a, J.T.K.; b, J. Marshall; c, B.W.; d, C.Y.K.; e, f, R. Streit.

PowerPoint slide

Full size image
The local (individual reef)-scale pattern of recurrent bleaching on the Great Barrier Reef also reveals the trend of increasing severity and the erosion of potential spatial refugia. Of the 171 individual reefs that were aerially surveyed three times, 43% bleached in 1998, 56% in 2002, and 85% in 2016. Knowing the bleaching history of these well-studied reefs allows us to investigate why they have bleached zero, one, two or three times. Only 9% of these repeatedly surveyed reefs have never bleached, in most cases because they are located near the southern, offshore end of the Great Barrier Reef (Fig. 1e), where they have experienced relatively low temperature anomalies during each event. A further 26% of repeatedly surveyed reefs have bleached only once—10 reefs in 1998, 8 in 2002, and 32 for the first time in 2016. The latter were primarily in the northern sector of the Great Barrier Reef, which largely escaped bleaching in the two earlier events (Fig. 1a). Thirty-five per cent of the reefs have bleached twice, but only one reef bleached in both 1998 and 2002, compared to 58 reefs that bleached either in 1998 or 2002 and for a second time in the severe 2016 event. Finally, 29% of the repeatedly surveyed reefs bleached for a third time in 2016, primarily in central areas of the Great Barrier Reef, because they experienced anomalously warm temperatures during all three events (Fig. 1b, e). We conclude that the overlap of disparate geographic footprints of heat stress explains why different reefs have bleached 0–3 times, that is, the repeated exposure to unusually hot conditions is the primary driver of the likelihood of recurrent bleaching at the scale of both individual reefs and the entire Great Barrier Reef (Fig. 1a, b). We found a similar strong relationship between the amount of bleaching measured underwater, and the satellite-based estimates of heat exposure on individual reefs (Fig. 3). Low levels of bleaching were observed at some locations when DHW values were only 2–3 °C-weeks. Typically, 30–40% of corals bleached on reefs exposed to 4 °C-weeks, whereas an average of 70–90% of corals bleached on reefs that experienced 8 °C-weeks or more (Fig. 3).

Figure 3: The relationship between heat exposure (satellite-based DHWs in 2016) and the amount of bleaching measured underwater (per cent of corals bleached) in March/April.
figure3
Each data point represents an individual reef (n = 69). The fitted line is y = 48.6ln(x) – 21.6, R2 = 0.545.

PowerPoint slide

Full size image
Resistance and adaptation to bleaching
Once we account for the amount of heat stress experienced on each reef, adding chlorophyll a, a proxy for water quality, to our statistical model yielded no support for the hypothesis that good water quality confers resistance to bleaching13. Rather, the estimated effect of chlorophyll a was to significantly reduce the DHW threshold for bleaching (Extended Data Table 1). However, despite the statistical significance, the effect in real terms beyond heat stress alone is very small (Extended Data Fig. 1). Similarly, we found no effect of the level of protection (in fished or protected zones) on bleaching (P > 0.1: Extended Data Table 1). These results are consistent with the broad-scale pattern of severe bleaching in the northern Great Barrier Reef, which affected hundreds of reefs across inshore–offshore gradients in water quality and regardless of their zoning (protection) status (Fig. 1a, b).

Similarly, we find no evidence for a protective effect of past bleaching (for example, from acclimation or adaptation): reefs with higher bleaching scores in 1998 or 2002 did not experience less severe bleaching in 2016, after accounting for the relationship between the 2016 temperature stress and bleaching propensity (P > 0.9 in all cases; Extended Data Fig. 3). Thus, while several studies have indicated that prior exposure can influence the subsequent bleaching responses of corals14,15,16,17, our comprehensive analysis of 171 repeatedly surveyed reefs indicates that any such historical effects on the Great Barrier Reef were masked by the severity of bleaching in 2016 (Fig. 2).

Winners and losers
Individual coral taxa bleached to different extents, especially on less-affected reefs, creating both winners (resistant corals) and losers (susceptible species), but the disparity among species diminished in the worst-affected, northern regions. (Fig. 4). At the population and assemblage level, when and where bleaching is severe, even century-old corals can bleach (Fig. 2b–d). By contrast, where bleaching is less intense, it is highly selective, with a broad spectrum of responses shown by winners versus losers; winners by definition bleach less and have higher survivorship18,19,20,21. On lightly and moderately bleached reefs (<10% or 10–30% of corals affected), predominantly in the southern Great Barrier Reef, many of the more robust coral taxa escaped with little or no bleaching in 2016. By contrast, on extremely bleached reefs in the north (60–80% or >80% overall bleaching), we found far fewer lightly bleached winners (Fig. 4). The rank order of winners versus losers also changed as the severity of bleaching increased (Extended Data Table 2), reflecting disparate responses by each taxon to the range of bleaching intensities. Thus, even species that are winners on relatively mildly bleached reefs joined the ranks of losers where bleaching was more intense (Fig. 4), creating a latitudinal gradient in the response of the coral assemblages.

Figure 4: Spectrum of bleaching responses by coral taxa on the Great Barrier Reef in 2016, with relative winners on the right, and losers on the left.
figure4
Individual species or genera (58,414 colonies) are plotted in rank descending order along the x axis from high to low levels of bleaching, for different severities of reef bleaching. Reef-scale bleaching severities are: blue, 1–10% of all corals bleached; green, 10–30%; yellow, 30–60%; orange, 60–80%; and red, >80% bleached. See Extended Data Table 2 for taxonomic details.

PowerPoint slide

Full size image
The recovery time for coral species that are good colonizers and fast growers is 10–15 years22,23,24, but when long-lived corals die from bleaching their replacement will necessarily take many decades. Recovery for long-lived species requires the sustained absence of another severe bleaching event (or other significant disturbance), which is no longer realistic while global temperatures continue to rise25. Therefore, the assemblage structure of corals is now likely to be permanently shifted at severely bleached locations in the northern Great Barrier Reef.

Implications for reef management
Our analysis has important implications for the management and conservation of coral reefs. We find that local management of coral reef fisheries and water quality affords little, if any, resistance to recurrent severe bleaching events: even the most highly protected reefs and near-pristine areas are highly susceptible to severe heat stress. On the remote northern Great Barrier Reef, hundreds of individual reefs were severely bleached in 2016 regardless of whether they were zoned as no-entry, no-fishing, or open to fishing, and irrespective of inshore–offshore differences in water quality (Fig. 1a and Extended Data Fig. 1). However, local protection of fish stocks and improved water quality may, given enough time, improve the prospects for recovery3,4,26,27,28,29. A key issue for all coral reefs is the frequency, or return time, of recurrent disturbance events, and whether there is sufficient time between successive bleachings for the re-assembly of mature coral assemblages. The chances of the northern Great Barrier Reef returning to its pre-bleaching assemblage structure are slim given the scale of damage that occurred in 2016 and the likelihood of a fourth bleaching event occurring within the next decade or two as global temperatures continue to rise.

Identifying and protecting spatial refugia is a common strategy for conservation of threatened species and ecosystems, including coral reefs30. However, our analyses indicate that the cumulative footprint of recurrent bleachings is expanding, and the number of potential refugia on the Great Barrier Reef is rapidly diminishing. Indeed, the remote northern region escaped serious damage in 1998 and 2002, but bore the brunt of extreme bleaching in 2016. Rather than relying on the premise of refugia, our results highlight the growing importance of promoting the recovery of reefs to recurrent bleaching events through local management of marine parks and water quality. However, bolstering resilience will become more challenging and less effective in coming decades because local interventions have had no discernible effect on resistance of corals to extreme heat stress, and, with the increasing frequency of severe bleaching events, the time for recovery is diminishing. Securing a future for coral reefs, including intensively managed ones such as the Great Barrier Reef, ultimately requires urgent and rapid action to reduce global warming.

Methods
No statistical methods were used to predetermine sample size. The experiments were not randomized and the investigators were not blinded to allocation during experiments and outcome assessment.

Recurrent bleaching on the Great Barrier Reef
For 2016, comprehensive aerial surveys of the Great Barrier Reef Marine Park and Torres Strait reported in Fig. 1a were conducted on ten days between 22 March 2016 and 17 April 2016 when bleaching was particularly visible. We used light aircraft and a helicopter, flying at an elevation of approximately 150 m. A total of 1,156 individual reefs from the coast to the edge of the continental shelf were assessed along 14° of latitude (Extended Data Fig. 4). Each reef was assigned by visual assessment to one of five categories of bleaching severity, using the same protocols as earlier aerial surveys conducted in 1998 and 2002 by R.B.8: 0, <1% of corals bleached; 1, 1–10%; 2, 10–30%; 3, 30–60%; and 4, >60% of corals bleached. The accuracy of the scores was assessed by underwater ground-truthing (see next section). The aerial scores are presented in Fig. 1a as heat maps (stretch type: minimum–maximum) using inverse distance weighting (IDW; power, 2; cell size, 1,000; search radius, variable; 100 points) in ArcGIS 10.2.1.

Underwater surveys of eastern and western Australia
To ground-truth the accuracy of aerial scores of bleaching on the Great Barrier Reef (Fig. 1a), we conducted in-water surveys on 104 reefs during March and April 2016 (Extended Data Fig. 5). We also measured differential species responses (winners versus losers; Fig. 4) on 83 reefs, spanning the 1,200-km-long central and northern Great Barrier Reef, from 10–19° S. We surveyed two sites per reef, using five 10 × 1 m belt transects placed on the reef crest at a depth of 2 m at each site. Observers identified and counted each coral colony and recorded a categorical bleaching score for each individual: 1, no bleaching; 2, pale; 3, 1–50% bleached; 4, 51–99% bleached; 5, 100% bleached; 6, bleached and recently dead. The site-level amount of bleaching for each taxon in Fig. 4 is the sum of categories 2–5. The number of colonies assessed was 58,414. A similar standardized protocol was used to measure amounts of bleaching for the Coral Sea, on sub-tropical reefs south of the Great Barrier Reef, and across 18° of latitude along the west coast of Australia (Fig. 1g).

Temperature and thermal stress
The spatial pattern of thermal stress on the Great Barrier Reef during each of the three major bleaching events (1998, 2002 and 2016; Fig. 1b, c) was quantified using the well-established DHW metric31. The DHW values were calculated using the optimum interpolation sea surface temperature (OISST)32, because it provides a consistent measure of thermal stress for all three major bleaching events on the Great Barrier Reef. The baseline climatology for the DHW metric was calculated for 1985–2012, following ref. 33. DHW values are presented in Fig. 1b as heat maps (stretch type: minimum–maximum) using inverse distance weighting (IDW; power, 2; cell size, 1,000; search radius, variable; 100 points) in ArcGIS 10.2.1. For Fig. 1g, March temperatures were compiled from HadISST1 (ref. 34) from 1980–2016 for four regions: northwest Australia, 10.5–20.5° S; mid-west Australia, 20.5–30.5° S; northern Great Barrier Reef, 10.5–16.5° S; and southern Great Barrier Reef, 21.5–24.5°S.

Water quality metrics
We considered remotely sensed chlorophyll a and Secchi depth proxies as water quality metrics, measured for the Great Barrier Reef35 over different averaging windows. Specifically, we used four averaging windows with respect to 2016 (1, 2 or 4 years before bleaching, and a long-term 1997–2016 average), and two different time periods (summer months only (December to May inclusive) and the entire year (June to May inclusive)). We also considered derived quantities from these estimates: the proportion of time that reefs exceeded an estimated water quality chlorophyll a threshold of 0.45 μg l−1 (ref. 13) and Secchi depth exposure, again for four different averaging windows, and for the full year and for summer only. All of these metrics were significantly correlated with one another. In particular, long-term (1997–2016) average chlorophyll a concentration was very highly correlated with all other metrics (absolute value of Spearman’s rank correlation coefficient averaged r = 0.81, and was never lower than 0.7). Therefore, to minimize the risk of type I errors, we used it as the water quality proxy in our analyses of bleaching, log-transformed to obtain a symmetric distribution of values.

Analysis of spatial patterns, resistance and adaptation
To model the factors affecting bleaching in 2016, we used aerial bleaching scores as a response variable; whether a reef was severely bleached (57% of reefs had a bleaching score of 3–4) or not (the remaining 43% of reefs had a bleaching score of 0–2), for all surveyed reefs in the Great Barrier Reef Marine Park. We considered temperature stress (measured as DHW, described above), water quality (measured as the natural logarithm of long-term chlorophyll a concentration), and marine protection status. Reefs in three zones classified as ‘Marine National Park’, ‘Preservation’, ‘Scientific Research’, and ‘Buffer’ were considered to be protected in the model, whereas all other zones were fished. We repeated our test using other splits of bleaching scores (0 versus 1–4, 0–1 versus 2–4, and 0–3 versus 4), although these led to more uneven splits of the data. Regardless of how the bleaching scores were binned, the severity of bleaching was significantly correlated with DHW, while the additional variables had effects that were similar to our original analysis: small in magnitude or statistically non-significant.

To calibrate the relationship between temperature and bleaching, we fit a generalized linear model (GLM) with binomial error structure, using DHW as the explanatory variable. To test the hypothesis that high water quality confers bleaching resistance13, we fit a model including both DHW and chlorophyll a as explanatory variables, and tested whether the effect of chlorophyll a concentration was significantly positive (that is, if reefs with higher chlorophyll a concentrations had a higher probability of bleaching). Similarly, to test the hypothesis that fishing increases bleaching resistance, we fit a model including DHW and protection status as explanatory variables, and tested whether the effect of protection was significantly negative (protected reefs had a lower probability of bleaching, at a given level of temperature stress, than fished reefs, see Extended Data Fig. 1 and Extended Data Table 1).

To test for evidence of acclimation or adaptation, we extracted the residuals from our DHW-only generalized linear model (Extended Data Table 1), and we tested for a negative correlation between the residuals and the aerial bleaching scores recorded during prior events: 1998, 2002 or the higher of the two earlier scores (Extended Data Fig. 1). That is, we tested the hypothesis that reefs that bleached more severely in prior events were less likely to bleach at a given temperature stress in 2016, compared to reefs that bleached less in prior events. Because bleaching score is ordered and categorical, we tested this hypothesis with Kendall’s τ.

For all of the apparent hardness of their skeletons, corals are rather fragile. Corals thrive under very specific conditions; in particular, they grow best within a small window of temperatures. If the water gets too hot or too cold, corals start to bleach and sometimes die.

The past two years have been the two hottest in the global temperature record, and coral reefs around the world are suffering because of it. The potent El Niño has amplified the problem. As a result, national and international science agencies have declared one of the worst global coral bleaching events on record.

“We are currently experiencing the longest global coral bleaching event ever observed,” said Mark Eakin, coordinator of NOAA’s Coral Reef Watch, in a February 2016 statement. “We may be looking at a 2- to 2.5-year-long event. Some areas have already seen bleaching two years in a row.”

Bleaching occurs when the algae that live inside corals (and give them some of their colors) are expelled due to stress, such as higher-than-normal water temperatures or pollution. The loss of the algae means the loss of a food source for the corals. Under extreme bleaching, corals become more susceptible to disease. Bleaching does not necessarily mean death for a reef, but it can often lead to it.

The images above and below are maps of sea surface temperature anomalies (SSTAs) in various regions over the past year. The maps do not depict absolute temperatures; instead, they show how much water temperatures were above (red) or below (blue) the long-term average for the same months from 2003 to 2012. Gray areas are too close to land and coastal shallows for a clear signal in this data set.

The map at the top of this page shows sea surface temperature anomalies for the southwestern Pacific Ocean for February and March 2016. The map below depicts equatorial Atlantic, Caribbean, and Pacific waters around the Americas in October and November 2015. The final map is a global view of SSTAs from November 2015 through February 2016, the peak of this winter’s El Niño.


October - November 2015

The maps were built with data from the Microwave Optimally Interpolated SST product, a NASA-supported effort at Remote Sensing Systems. The research team combines measurements from the U.S. Navy’s WindSAT instrument on the Coriolis satellite and the AMSR2 instrument on Japan’s GCOM-W. The sensors observe emissions of microwaves and infrared light from the sea surface, capturing the temperature of the top few millimeters of the water.

Temperatures on these maps show above-average readings, but do not necessarily look extreme in the areas around the reefs. But keep in mind that corals are sensitive to relatively minor changes in temperature. Researchers from NOAA also point out that sustained heat stress over a long period of time—weeks to months—is more damaging than brief, extreme events.

Researchers from Australia’s Coral Bleaching Taskforce have reported that nearly 93 percent of the Great Barrier Reef has been affected in some way by the bleaching event. Temperatures around the reef most recently peaked in February and March 2016. After conducting aerial and in-water surveys, scientists observed that 81 percent of the reefs between Cairns, Australia, and Papua-New Guinea have been severely bleached, with another 18 percent partially bleached. Some reports suggest 50 percent of the corals might be dead already. Along the central latitudes of the reef system, 33 percent of the reefs were severely bleached, with another 56 partly affected. In the southernmost reaches, 1 percent was severely bleached and 74 percent had some level of distress. The central and southern portions were actually aided a bit by Cyclone Winston. The severe storm churned up enough cold water to reduce surface water temperatures and moderate the bleaching.

In the Caribbean and the reefs of the Florida Keys, bleaching events were most severe in the fall of 2015. Reefs around the Hawaiian Islands, Fiji, and other Pacific islands have been severely stressed and bleached. With 2016 global temperatures already setting records, there is concern that bleaching could occur again in 2016.

NOAA satellite data and products have been a vital component in predicting and analyzing coral bleaching during the ongoing third global bleaching event that began in mid-2014. Several global reef locations have been repeatedly exposed to bleaching levels of heat stress during this period, bringing into question whether they can maintain key ecosystem services. Analysis of bleaching along the Great Barrier Reef (GBR) during 2016, published in the prestigious journal Nature, shows the amount of bleaching on individual reefs in 2016 was tightly linked to local high ocean temperatures. "The Great Barrier Reef was among the reefs hit the worst by the ongoing, severe global coral bleaching event," said Dr. Mark Eakin, Coordinator of NOAA's Coral Reef Watch.

According to the study's lead author, Professor Terry Hughes from the Australian Research Council Centre of Excellence for Coral Reef Studies at James Cook University, "The severity of the 2016 bleaching was off the chart", and more severe than the two previous major bleaching episodes on the GBR in 1998 and 2002.

NOAA's Coral Reef Watch program has monitored all three severe events on the GBR using satellite remote sensing, revealing that the 2016 heat exposure in the northern GBR was unprecedented. Reef resource managers, scientists, and policymakers around the world and in all seven U.S. coral reef jurisdictions rely on NOAA's predictions and satellite monitoring to prepare for and respond to bleaching events.

On the GBR, past exposure to bleaching in 1998 and 2002 did not lessen the severity of the bleaching in 2016. With GBR corals currently exposed to high levels of heat stress again in 2017, researchers have just remobilized to conduct aerial and underwater surveys to examine if impacts of heat stress are amplified with recurrent bleaching events. This adds to the list of locations (in the U.S.: Guam, the Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands, Hawaii, and Florida) that has seen back-to-back years of bleaching since the ongoing global coral bleaching event began in 2014.

With such limited time for recovery, ecosystem impacts are expected to escalate. "As the globe warms we're seeing more recurrent coral bleaching events, with more downstream effects as well, including loss of shoreline protection and fish habitat, and impacts on people's livelihoods," said Dr. Eakin.


January 2014-December 2016 Global map of 5 km Maximum Bleaching Alert Area

All tropical oceans were unusually hot between January 2014 and December 2016, with most coral reef ecosystems being exposed to conditions that cause severe bleaching and death of corals.



Key points from the study:
2015-2016 saw record temperatures that triggered a massive episode of coral bleaching across the tropics, as confirmed by both aerial and in-water surveys, including along the Great Barrier Reef.
Coral bleaching events should no longer be thought of as individual disturbances to reefs, but as recurring events that threaten the viability of coral reefs globally.
The Great Barrier Reef has had three major bleaching episodes, in 1998, 2002 and 2016, with the latest being the most severe and with catastrophic levels of bleaching occurring in the northern third of the Reef (a region approximately 800 km or 500 miles in length).
The amount of bleaching on individual reefs in 2016 was tightly linked to local heat exposure.
The cumulative, superimposed footprint of the three mass bleaching events on the Great Barrier Reef has now encompassed virtually all of the Reef.
Better water quality or reduced fishing pressure did not significantly reduce the severity of bleaching.
Past exposure to bleaching in 1998 and 2002 did not lessen the severity of the bleaching in 2016!

Paper Abstract:
During 2015-2016, record temperatures triggered a pan-tropical episode of coral bleaching, the third global-scale event since mass bleaching was first documented in the 1980s. This study examines how and why the severity of recurrent major bleaching events has varied at multiple scales, using aerial and underwater surveys of Australian reefs combined with satellite-derived sea surface temperatures. The distinctive geographic footprints of recurrent bleaching on the Great Barrier Reef in 1998, 2002 and 2016 were determined by the spatial pattern of sea temperatures in each year. Water quality and fishing pressure had minimal effect on the unprecedented bleaching in 2016, suggesting that local protection of reefs affords little or no resistance to extreme heat. Similarly, past exposure to bleaching in 1998 and 2002 did not lessen the severity of bleaching in 2016. Consequently, immediate global action to curb future warming is essential to secure a future for coral reefs.


Few coral reefs remain unscathed by mass bleaching over the past several decades, and much of the coral reef science conducted today relates in some way to the causes, consequences, or recovery pathways of bleaching events. Most studies portray a simple cause and effect relationship between anomalously high summer temperatures and bleaching, which is understandable given that bleaching rarely occurs outside these unusually warm times. However, the statistical skill with which temperature captures bleaching is hampered by many “false alarms”, times when temperatures reached nominal bleaching levels, but bleaching did not occur. While these false alarms are often not included in global bleaching assessments, they offer valuable opportunities to improve predictive skill, and therefore understanding, of coral bleaching events. Here, I show how a statistical framework adopted from weather forecasting can optimize bleaching predictions and validate which environmental factors play a role in bleaching susceptibility. Removing the 1 °C above the maximum monthly mean cutoff in the typical degree heating weeks (DHW) definition, adjusting the DHW window from 12 to 9 weeks, using regional-specific DHW thresholds, and including an El Niño threshold already improves the model skill by 45%. Most importantly, this framework enables hypothesis testing of other factors or metrics that may improve our ability to forecast coral bleaching events.

Cite this as

DeCarlo TM. 2020. Treating coral bleaching as weather: a framework to validate and optimize prediction skill. PeerJ 8:e9449 https://doi.org/10.7717/peerj.9449
Main article text
 
Introduction
Coral bleaching, the loss of the symbiotic zooxanthellae algae that live within coral tissues, is recognized as one of the primary threats facing reef-building corals today. Although bleaching is occasionally observed in isolated or scattered coral colonies, “mass bleaching events” occur when multiple species across entire reefs bleach at once. The link between mass coral bleaching and unusually warm water temperature was established in the wake of the widespread 1982-83 El Niño, which caused severe bleaching across the Pacific Ocean (Glynn, 1983; Glynn, 1993; Coffroth, Lasker & Oliver, 1990). Since then, bleaching events have become more frequent (Hughes et al., 2018), and have continued to coincide with anomalously high temperatures (e.g., Bruno et al., 2001; DeCarlo et al., 2017; Donner et al., 2017; Hughes et al., 2017; Barkley et al., 2018; Sully et al., 2019). Yet, some high-temperature events have not caused bleaching (Thompson & Van Woesik, 2009; Pratchett et al., 2013; Gintert et al., 2018; DeCarlo & Harrison, 2019). The absence of bleaching is often not included in large-scale analyses of coral bleaching (but see e.g.,  Sully et al., 2019), which precludes a statistical validation of the skill of temperature in predicting bleaching events. Rather, our ability to predict bleaching, and to understand the causes of these events, depends on correctly capturing both the presence and absence of bleaching.

One way to critically assess our understanding of the causes of coral bleaching is to view these events within a weather-forecasting framework (Van Hooidonk & Huber, 2009). Meteorologists have a strong understanding of the factors that cause precipitation, and they are able to predict when and where there will be rain or snow based on wind, temperature, and pressure patterns. Intuitively, we want to know both when rain will fall, and when it will not. Forecasting rain when it is actually sunny is deemed just as bad as forecasting clear skies when it actually rains. We should view coral bleaching in the same way. Fortunately, the statistical tools to do so are already in place because weather forecasters have been validating and optimizing their predictions for decades. Here, I apply weather forecasting statistics to a global coral bleaching database to (1) evaluate the skill of bleaching predictions, and (2) explore various approaches to improve prediction skill. Additionally, since the choice of sea surface temperature (SST) product affects bleaching predictions (DeCarlo & Harrison, 2019), as a first step I evaluate the agreement between various SST products in terms of representing global mean anomalies.

Methods
To assess the agreement between the various SST products that could be used here to predict coral bleaching, I calculated global-mean annual SST anomalies using six datasets:

Coral Reef Watch’s CoralTemp (CRW) (Liu et al., 2014), Optimum Interpolation SST (OI-SSTv2) (Reynolds et al., 2007; Banzon et al., 2016), the Canadian Meteorological Center (CMC) (Canada Meteorological Center, 2012), the Extended Reconstructed SST version 5 (ERSSTv5) (Huang et al., 2017), the Met Office Hadley Centre SST version 4 (HadSST4) (Kennedy et al., 2019), and the Japan Meteorological Agency (JMA) Centennial In Situ Observation-Based Estimates of SST (COBE2) (Hirahara, Ishii & Fukuda, 2014). Comparing global-mean annual SST anomalies is a coarse evaluation since it does not account for potentially important differences on relatively small spatial and temporal scales. Nevertheless, this type of analysis is common for evaluations of SST products (Huang et al., 2018), and it can identify the broad-scale differences among products. I performed a principal component analysis (PCA) to evaluate how SST products cluster together. Additionally, I calculated pair-wise annual differences between the products to identify any consistent discrepancies between products.

The key to applying weather forecasting statistics to coral bleaching is a database complete with both presence and absence of bleaching, which only recently became available (Hughes et al., 2018). Other databases, such as the bleaching reports in ReefBase, are unsuitable because they are dominated by reports of bleaching and include relatively few observations of the absence of bleaching (e.g., see Logan et al., 2012). The complete database of Hughes et al. (2018), however, enables the application of binary (presence/absence) event detection metrics that are commonly used to evaluate weather forecasts. In addition to bleaching absences, this database includes “moderate” (1–30% bleaching) and “severe” (greater than 30% bleaching) events, but for most analyses here the moderate and severe events are combined to reduce the data to bleaching presence/absence (but see exception below when only severe events are considered). All of the binary metrics are based on a simple contingency table of predictions versus observations (Table 1). No single metric can capture all the information in the dataset, and thus a variety of metrics are used to evaluate predictive skill (Table 2). Together, these metrics can be used to validate whether a predictor performs better than random chance, and to optimize the threshold of a continuous predictor used to forecast events. Metrics focused on one aspect of the prediction skill (Accuracy, Probability of Detection, Bias, Probability of False Detection, and False Alarm Ratio) generally change monotonically with the DHW threshold. Thus, while these metrics hold key information, they do not clearly provide an optimal threshold. Conversely, the Equitable Threat Score (ETS) accounts for multiple aspects of the forecast, rewarding correct predictions and penalizing incorrect ones (Hamill, 1999). ETS is the most commonly used threshold optimizer in weather forecasts (ECMWF, 2018), and it is adopted here as a guide for coral bleaching predictions. It is worth noting that ETS and the related Pierce’s Skill Score have previously been applied to evaluate coral bleaching (Van Hooidonk & Huber, 2009; Mollica et al., 2019), but not yet on a dataset like Hughes et al. (2018) that is complete with both presence and absence. Additionally, there are other skill scores in use (Table 2), which are insightful under some circumstances, but are generally considered less robust and are used less frequently by weather forecasters.

Table 1:
Schematic contingency table of observed and predicted events.
Observed
yes	no
Predicted	yes	Hits (“H”)	False Alarms (“FA”)
no	Misses (“M”)	Correct Negatives (“CN”)
DOI: 10.7717/peerj.9449/table-1
Table 2:
Metrics to assess the binary (presence/absence) detection of events. The various metrics, formulas, meanings, and ranges are displayed.
Test	Formula	Meaning	Range
Accuracy	(H +CN)/n	Fraction of predictions correct	0 to 1, 1 = perfect, 0.5 = no skill
Bias	(H +FA)/(H +M)	Predicted “yes” relative to observed “yes”	0 to infinity, 1 = perfect
Probability of Detection (PD)	H/(H +M)	Fraction observed “yes” were predicted	0 to 1, 1 = perfect, 0.5 = no skill
Probability of False Detection (PFD)	FA/(CN +FA)	Fraction of observed “no” were predicted “yes”	0 to 1, 0 = perfect
False Alarm Ratio	FA/(H +FA)	Fraction of predicted “yes” were not observed	0 to 1, 0 = perfect
Equitable Threat Score (ETS)	H/(H +FA +M-Hrandom)	Correspondence of predicted events to observed events, but accounting for hits due to random chance	−1/3 to 1, 1 = perfect, 0 = no skill
Threat Score (TS)	H/(H +FA +M)	Correspondence of predicted events to observed events	0 to 1, 1 = perfect, 0 = no skill
Odds Ratio Skill Score (ORSS)	(H∗CN − M∗FA)∕(H∗CN + M∗FA)	The improvement of predictions above random chance	−1 to 1, 1 = perfect, 0 = no skill
Pierce’s Skill Score	H/(H +M)-FA/(FA +CN)	Separation of events from non-events	−1 to 1, 1 = perfect, 0 = no skill
DOI: 10.7717/peerj.9449/table-2
Notes:

Hrandom =(H + FA)∗(H + M)∕n, where n is the total number of observations (3,500 in this case).

The SST product OI-SSTv2 was identified as the most appropriate for this analysis due to its relatively high resolution (∼25-km and daily), temporal coverage from 1982 to present, and agreement with most other SST datasets (see Results and Discussion). Further supporting the use of OI-SSTv2 here is that it is designed to minimize temporal bias by using a single type of sensor, the advanced very high resolution radiometer (AVHRR) (Banzon et al., 2016). Indeed, in a comparison of satellite SST to In Situ reef-water temperature measured by loggers on the Great Barrier Reef, OI-SSTv2 was more consistent over time than other SST products, especially in terms of representing the highest summer temperatures (DeCarlo & Harrison, 2019).

Here, I used OI-SSTv2 as a predictor of coral bleaching events at 100 globally-distributed reef sites between 1982 and 2016 (using the database of Hughes et al., 2018). I calculated degree heating weeks (DHW) from OI-SSTv2, defining the climatological maximum monthly mean (MMM) based on 1982-2012. DHW incorporates both the magnitude and duration of SST anomalies above the MMM, and is commonly used as a predictor of coral bleaching (Liu, Strong & Skirving, 2003; Liu et al., 2006; Hughes et al., 2017). Since many of the reef areas in the database are larger than 25 km, I used the maximum annual DHW among the grid-box closest to the database coordinates and its neighbors. The database as published in Hughes et al. (2018) required fixing coordinates for 13 out of 100 sites (Table S1). Additionally, bleaching in the central and northern Great Barrier Reef was incorrectly labeled in the original database as moderate in 1983, when the literature on this event indicates that it was instead a severe event in 1982 (Fisk & Done, 1985; Harriott, 1985; Oliver, 1985). Likewise, 1987 bleaching in the Galápagos Islands was reported as severe, but the literature clearly shows that this was a moderate event (Podestá & Glynn, 1997; Glynn et al., 2001; Glynn et al., 2017). Finally, no bleaching occurred in the Al Lith region of the Red Sea during 2010 (event removed because no literature supports this event). The adjustments I made to the bleaching histories from the database as published in Hughes et al. (2018) improved the statistical skill, albeit only slightly since my changes affected relatively few entries in the database (Tables S2–S3). Even though the database was presented as being temporally complete (i.e., the authors implied that the full history of bleaching during 1980–2016 was known at each of the 100 sites), it is possible that other inaccuracies exist in the database, including either mislabeling as noted above or bleaching events that went unnoticed. Nevertheless, except for the noted corrections, I took the database at face value since no alternative global databases are suitable for this study. Additionally, I explored whether patterns in the database are indicative of unnoticed bleaching events in the early part of the database by evaluating whether (1) false alarms decrease and (2) ETS increases over time.

The common definition of DHW includes a 1 °C above the MMM cutoff for accumulating heat stress, and DHW are calculated over the preceding 12 weeks. In initial analyses, I tested whether removing the 1 °C cutoff (i.e., DHW begin accumulating as soon as SST exceeds the MMM), and using time windows shorter than 12 weeks, improved the results. I also varied the DHW threshold used to predict bleaching between 1 and 15 °C-weeks to find the optimal value. In subsequent analyses, I evaluated whether prediction skill increased when using regional-specific DHW thresholds, and including an additional El Niño threshold (based on the Niño3.4 SST anomaly definition of El Niño). Additionally, I evaluated if maximum Hotspots (SST anomalies above the MMM) or the Marine Heatwave index (Hobday et al., 2018) performed better than DHW since some analyses of coral bleaching events have found these shorter-term metrics to be most effective (Berkelmans et al., 2004; Genevier et al., 2019). Finally, I tested whether there is evidence for an increase in the bleaching threshold over time.

Results and Discussion
Choice of SST product
A variety of SST products are available that include a range of spatial resolution (∼5 km to over 200 km), temporal resolution (daily to monthly), temporal coverage (several decades to beyond a century), and methods for bias correction. These products can broadly be classified into two groups: coarse-resolution centennial-scale datasets that rely heavily on In Situ observations (but may include satellite data), and higher resolution datasets beginning in the 1980s that are based on satellite observations (but may use In Situ data for bias corrections). Satellite-based products are most commonly used for coral bleaching studies due to their higher resolution (e.g., Liu et al., 2014), but it is crucial to recognize that important differences exist between these products (e.g., DeCarlo & Harrison, 2019), likely resulting from the use of different satellite data and the techniques used for bias correction. Thus, the choice of satellite-based SST product can lead to different conclusions in analyses of the drivers of coral bleaching events (DeCarlo & Harrison, 2019).

My analysis of global-mean annual SST anomalies indicates that Coral Reef Watch is a clear outlier from the five other products (Fig. 1). This is evident in both the PCA (Fig. 1C) and pairwise comparisons among products (Figs. 1D–1H; see also Fig. S1). Since the five other products cluster relatively close together (Fig. 1C), even though they are based on partially different source data and different methods, it would be difficult to conclude that the relatively large disparity in Coral Reef Watch represents a more accurate version of SST. Pair-wise comparisons between Coral Reef Watch and the other products show a temporal pattern in which Coral Reef Watch underestimates SST from the mid-1990s to the early 2000s, a pattern that is also represented by the 2nd principal component (Figs. 1D–1H). A similar temporal change in bias between Coral Reef Watch and In Situ loggers was also found on the Great Barrier Reef, in which Coral Reef Watch underestimated reef-water temperatures during 1998, 2002, and 2004 (DeCarlo & Harrison, 2019). Additionally, the root-mean-square error (RMSE) between Coral Reef Watch and other SST products is 0.04–0.07 °C, whereas all other pair-wise combinations have RMSE ≤0.04 °C (Fig. S1). While these differences may seem small, they are sufficient to substantially change DHW, and more detailed analyses on the Great Barrier Reef showed that the differences are exacerbated in the summer months (DeCarlo & Harrison, 2019). Thus, even though Coral Reef Watch performs well during the past decade (DeCarlo et al., 2019; DeCarlo & Harrison, 2019; Claar, Cobb & Baum, 2019), I conclude that it has inaccuracies in earlier times that render it inappropriate for multi-decadal analyses of past coral bleaching events. Since the other products are limited by either coarse spatial and temporal resolution (ERSSTv5, HadSST4, COBE2) or temporal coverage (CMC, which only begins in 1992), this leaves OI-SSTv2 as the most suitable SST product to analyze past coral bleaching events globally since 1982.

Comparison of global-mean annual sea surface temperature (SST) anomalies among various SST products.
Figure 1: Comparison of global-mean annual sea surface temperature (SST) anomalies among various SST products.
(A) Global-mean SST anomalies from 1982–2016, (B) the same data but detrended, and (C) Principal component analysis (PCA) of the detrended annual SST anomalies. (D-H) Pairwise differences of the global-mean anomalies between Coral Reef Watch (CRW) and the other SST products (black) plotted alongside PC2 (light blue). Note that although PC has arbitrary units, it mainly tracks the mismatches between Coral Reef Watch and other products.
  Download full-size imageDOI: 10.7717/peerj.9449/fig-1
The skill of predicting coral bleaching and how to improve it
The numbers of hits, misses, false alarms, and correct negatives vary systematically with the DHW threshold. As this threshold is raised, the numbers of hits decrease, misses increase, false alarms decrease, and correct negatives increase (Fig. 2). This reveals that there are tradeoffs involved in setting the DHW threshold, and these need to be evaluated carefully. For instance, using a low DHW threshold of 2 °C-weeks maximizes the number of hits and minimizes the number of misses, both of which are beneficial features of a forecast. However, such a low DHW threshold produces a large number of false alarms, typically more than half of reef sites each year. These tradeoffs can be quantified in various ways by inspecting how the binary metrics (Table 2) change with the DHW threshold (Figs. 3 and 4). In particular, the Equitable Threat Score (ETS) provides an objective way to define the optimal DHW, which in this case was 6.3 °C-weeks (when using DHW defined over a 12-week window).

Reconstructing coral bleaching events with degree heating weeks (DHW).
Figure 2: Reconstructing coral bleaching events with degree heating weeks (DHW).
The four panels show the numbers of (A) hits, (B) false alarms, (C) misses, and (D) correct negatives when bleaching events are predicted for 100 globally-distributed reef systems using various DHW thresholds (colors). The black line indicates the optimal DHW threshold (6.3 °C-weeks) determined by the Equitable Threat Score (ETS; see below).
  Download full-size imageDOI: 10.7717/peerj.9449/fig-2
ETS for the globally-distributed bleaching events using various predictors and responses.
Figure 3: ETS for the globally-distributed bleaching events using various predictors and responses.
(A) The analysis was performed with various time windows used to define DHW (yellow to purple colors), DHW including the 1 °C above the MMM cutoff (green; using a 12-week window), maximum Hotspots (light blue), maximum Marine Heatwave (MHW) index (black), or only for severe bleaching events (magenta; using DHW with a 9-week window). Comparison of the green line with the darkest purple line shows the change in absolute value of DHW when including or excluding, respectively, the 1 °C above the MMM cutoff in the DHW definition. (B) Maximum ETS achieved with each of the temperature predictors that were evaluated here.
  Download full-size imageDOI: 10.7717/peerj.9449/fig-3
Forecasting metrics for the skill of reconstructing coral bleaching events from DHW.
Figure 4: Forecasting metrics for the skill of reconstructing coral bleaching events from DHW.
The analysis was performed regionally (colored lines) and globally (dark gray line). The definitions of the various metrics (A-I) are listed in Table 2. The black circles indicate the metric values corresponding to the optimal DHW threshold, as determined by the maximum ETS.
  Download full-size imageDOI: 10.7717/peerj.9449/fig-4
Initial analyses were conducted to determine the best way to define heat stress (Fig. 3 and Table 3). Removing the 1 °C cutoff for accumulating heat stress, and setting the DHW time window to 9 weeks, both improved prediction skill (higher maximum ETS; Fig. 3B). Thus, all further analyses were conducted with DHWs accumulating anytime SST exceeded the MMM over the preceding 9 weeks. With this definition, the optimal DHW for predicting bleaching events was 5.4 °C-weeks. Using either maximum annual Hotspot or MHW decreased prediction skill (Fig. 3B), likely because both metrics represent only magnitude (not duration) of heat stress, and because MHW is not restricted to summer months (i.e., a winter heatwave is unlikely to cause bleaching). Since restricting MHW to summer months would make it effectively the same as Hotspots, and incorporating heatwave duration would make it similar to DHW, there is little utility in the MHW index for coral bleaching. Prediction skill was higher for only severe, rather than all, bleaching events, and the optimal DHW threshold (the DHW at which ETS is maximized) was higher for severe events. These results are consistent with severe bleaching being a result of more intense heat stress, which makes these events easier to separate from non-bleaching events.

The ETS varies among regions, with the Indian Ocean and Middle East performing the best, and the Western Atlantic performing the worst (Fig. 4). Evaluations of weather forecasts often consider ETS alongside Bias because ETS tends to reward hits most favorably, and as a result ETS sometimes suggests a threshold with a large positive Bias (i.e., more events are forecast than actually occur). At the optimal DHW threshold, the Bias is relatively close to 1 (0.96) for the Indian Ocean and Middle East, whereas the Bias reaches 1.69 for the Pacific. When all regions are considered together, the ETS is 0.169 and the Bias is 1.27. Using a regional-specific DHW threshold improves the global ETS to 0.2035 (Table 3). As context for these ETS values, weather forecasts predicting rain the following day in the United States and Europe have an ETS of around 0.4, and rain predictions made a week in advance have an ETS of 0.15 (ECMWF, 2018). It is important to note that the relatively low ETS of bleaching predictions could reflect a variety of errors. In addition to imperfections in DHW as a predictor, potential errors include inaccuracies in the bleaching database (e.g., unreported bleaching events), or disparities in spatial scales between bleaching and satellite-based SST (i.e., localized warming in reef micro-climates may not be detected in 25-km grid-boxes). Although the potential for bleaching under localized warming is difficult to test retrospectively, if there were more unreported bleaching events earlier in the database, more false alarms would be expected further back in time. However, there are fewer false alarms during 1982–1999 than 2000–2016 (Fig. 2B), even though most reefs were probably monitored less in earlier years. Further, there is no significant trend over time in ETS (Fig. S2) as might be expected if the accuracy of the database improved over time. Therefore, while it remains possible that inaccuracies exist in the database, the patterns in model skill over time do not suggest that this is a major issue.

Table 3:
Changes in ETS and Bias associated with different bleaching predictors and responses.
Conditions evaluated	Max ETS	ΔETS	Bias at max ETS
Including 1 °C cutoff for DHWa,b	0.1500	–	0.9867
Excluding 1 °C cutoff for DHWa,b,d	0.1643	+0.0143	1.1708
DHW defined with 9-week windowa,c,d	0.1688	+0.0045*	1.2670
Including El Niño thresholda,c,d	0.1983	+0.0295	0.8342
Including regional DHW thresholdsa,c,d	0.2035	+0.0338	1.2405
Including El Niño and regional DHW thresholdsa,c,d	0.2182	+0.0495	0.8242
Only “severe” bleaching eventsc,d	0.1883	+0.0195	1.4749
Maximum Hotspotsa	0.1038	−0.0650	1.4245
Maximum Marine Heatwave indexa	0.1268	−0.0420	0.9784
DOI: 10.7717/peerj.9449/table-3
Notes:

aanalysis of bleaching presence (including “moderate” and “severe”) versus absence.
bDHW defined with 12-week window.
cDHW defined with 9-week window.
dDHW defined without the 1 °C cutoff.
*all subsequent ΔETS are relative to this value.
One key advantage of the weather forecasting approach is that ETS can be used to objectively test whether other factors modulate the relationship between temperature and bleaching. For example, I tested whether ETS improves with the inclusion of a second predictor: (1) a DHW-threshold trend or (2) El Niño conditions (Fig. 5). A trend in the DHW threshold over time could arise either if corals acclimatize to more frequent heatwaves, or if bleaching events selectively kill the most susceptible species or individuals. For simplicity, I assume any change in the DHW threshold has occurred linearly, although this may be less applicable to changes in heat tolerance following selective mortality events. Previous analyses have concluded that the DHW threshold has increased (Guest et al., 2012; Logan et al., 2014; Hughes et al., 2019; DeCarlo et al., 2019; Sully et al., 2019). However, the ETS-based analysis presented here indicates that including any trend in the DHW threshold does not improve the ETS (the top 2% of ETS values overlap with zero trend), and therefore the null hypothesis that the DHW threshold has remained constant cannot be rejected. Additionally, El Niño alters the coupled ocean-atmosphere circulation globally, and thus El Niño could affect bleaching independently of temperature through a variety of mechanisms linked to, for example, winds or clouds (Smith, 2001; DeCarlo et al., 2017; Baird et al., 2017). ETS improves from 0.169 to 0.198 (or to 0.218 if using regional-specific DHW thresholds; Table 3) when including El Niño as an additional threshold, and critically, the highest ETS values are associated with stronger than normal El Niño conditions (Fig. 5). This is clear evidence that El Niño modulates coral bleaching across the tropics through mechanisms beyond just SST because greater skill (higher ETS) is achieved when the El Niño threshold is used in combination with DHW, rather than using DHW alone. Elucidating these non-temperature mechanisms by which El Niño influences bleaching should therefore represent a high priority for future research.

Evaluation of multivariate predictions of coral bleaching events.
Figure 5: Evaluation of multivariate predictions of coral bleaching events.
Colors indicate the ETS score for various combinations of the predictors, and black contours show the top 2% of ETS scores. The main analysis was repeated using DHW (with a 9-week window) as a predictor and including a DHW-threshold trend (A), or an El Niño threshold (B). In the trend analysis, the DHW threshold on the y-axis shows the threshold during 1999. The El Niño index is defined as the mean SST anomaly (relative to the 1900–2018 monthly climatology in HadISST; Rayner et al., 2003) in the Nino3.4 region, and the threshold is taken as the maximum El Niño index per year.
  Download full-size imageDOI: 10.7717/peerj.9449/fig-5
Conclusions
Temperature extremes are undoubtedly the primary driver of coral bleaching, but they may not be the only factor involved. Light, nutrients, previous stress history, temperature variance, and rate of warming, among other factors, have all been evoked as contributors to bleaching susceptibility (Thompson & Van Woesik, 2009; Skirving et al., 2017; Safaie et al., 2018; DeCarlo & Harrison, 2019; Lapointe et al., 2019). While satellite-derived SST data are easy to access, relying on temperature alone to predict bleaching events could lead to overconfidence in its role relative to other factors. Indeed, it may seem surprising that we should put only as much confidence in our ability to reconstruct bleaching events from temperature as we put in rain forecast for next week. The reliability of weather forecasts has improved dramatically over time as a result of continuous evaluation and optimization of the predictor variables. Surely, our ability to predict—and therefore to understand—coral bleaching events can also improve, if critically evaluated within the statistical framework provided by weather forecasting. Removing the 1 °C above the MMM cutoff in the DHW definition, adjusting the DHW window from 12 to 9 weeks, using regional-specific DHW thresholds, and including an El Niño threshold already improves ETS by 45%. My analysis of various predictors is not exhaustive as other heat stress metrics are possible, such as including temperature variance or the beneficial effects of cooling respites during heat stress (e.g., Logan et al., 2012; Logan et al., 2014; Ainsworth et al., 2016; Safaie et al., 2018; McClanahan et al., 2019). Rather, the analyses presented here are a demonstration of how ETS can be used to test hypotheses regarding which aspect(s) of temperature and/or other factors are most strongly correlated to bleaching events. Setting our sights on achieving even greater skill will be essential for informing management decisions based on coral sensitivity to heat stress (e.g., Beyer et al., 2018; Darling et al., 2019).

Ar‐Razzaza Lake is one of the largest Lakes in Iraq. It
lies at the middle part of the country. It receives water from
Euphrates via Habbaniya Lake. Governmentally, it is divided
into two parts, the upper part belongs to Anbaar providence
and the lower part belongs to Karbala’ providence. It
occupies the area of two former lakes, Bahr Al‐Milih (sea of
salt) and Hor Abu‐Ddibis, and was created to absorb the
sudden waters of floods at that time. The lake is surrounded
by deserted and semi‐deserted areas that made it as an
isolated waterbody amid desert that raises its avifaunal
importance. There are some large islands within the lake
which are bare islands but very important for some breeding
birds (see below).
The eastern and northern sides of the lake are sandy shores of rocky base with some scattered,
prominent rock‐walls, while the western and southern sides are uneven edges made by the
wadies and some valleys of various sizes that bring the rain water from the Western Desert
down to the lake depression. The western side of the lake is richer with plant cover as there are
considerable reed beds and bushes either in these wadies or on the edge of the lake, while the
eastern side lacks such dense vegetation save scattered deserted plant (but there are some
reed beds in the attached canals). Such a variety in topography enhanced the biodiversity over
the area, subsequently, birdlife over the whole lake, therefore, it was considered as “Important
Bird Area” according to the BirdLife International criteria.
Ar‐Razzaza Lake has some sort of local tourism importance in Iraq. It is considered as one of the
main places that used for recreation during vacation times. But, obviously, this became very
limited after establishing military base close to the tourism area. Also, there are three
important sites for tourism around the lake:
 Shthatha or Ein‐Tamr, at the southern corner of the lake (N32 29, E43 45), which is a
permanent oasis with dense date‐palm orchards of its own specialty of palm‐handcrafts;
 Qas‐Al‐Ekheidhir, south of the lake (N32 26 24.32, E43 36 10.04), which is very beautiful
old palace/fort (maybe 700 year ago). The construction is still in good condition and was
receiving some tourists. It lies on the main road that goes to Mecca through Arabia;
 Imam Ahmad‐Bin‐Hashim, is holly shrine at the western side of the lake (N32 38 41, E43
26 42) that used to be visited seasonally by many people from the south of Iraq.
2 | P a g e
Disturbances and threats:
Ten of thousands of Ducks and Coot were sold in Baghdad, Karbala’, Hilla and Najaf markets,
which used to be brought from Ar‐Razzaza lake especially during the 90s. We think the ultimate
bulk of hunt in the lake was during the 90s and early 2000s due to the draining of the Lower
Mesopotamian marshlands when Ar‐Razzaza represents one of the key alternatives for
migratory and wintering birds in Iraq.
Noteworthy Avifauna:
Because of the diversity of topography and vegetation of this area, in addition to its lying on
some of the main migration routes of the birds that are crossing Iraq during their Eurasian‐
African migration, and the huge wintering populations of Water fowl; Ar‐Razzaza Lake is
considered as an area of national, regional (regarding the Middle East) and even Zoo‐regional
(regarding to the old‐world migration). Therefore, there are considerable wintering Waterfowl
used to overwinter in Razzaza Abstracting the historical bird‐observations, Lake Ar‐Razzaza is
an extremely important staging and wintering area for a wide variety of waterfowl, notably
grebes, cormorants, pelicans, flamingos, ducks, coots and gulls, as well as huge numbers of
Waders. Over 100,000 waterfowl were recorded during rapid censuses in January 1975 and
January 1979. These included some globally threatened, endangered and conservation concern
bird‐species that used to winter in the lake. Additionally, the lake has harbored considerable
numbers of breeding Marbled Duck (Vulnerable) regularly, besides to some other important
birds.
During our last surveys to Ar‐Razzaza at 2008, the team has witnessed the impact of the lack of
water on the lake and its fauna. Massive mortality in fish found there and the local people
referred to the continuous decreasing of the water‐level and increasing of salinity.
Nevertheless, some important observations were found regarding the birds of the lake. The
conservation concern Greater Flamingo groups were at the shores of the lake where they might
breed in nearby site (because of existence of young birds, in addition to the time of the
breeding). Also, the lake is very important for breeding of considerable population of the
conservation concern Slender‐billed Gull that breeds in considerable colonies of which we
found some sort of mortality in their chicks, which were found dead massively while the chicks
were in early ages (one to two weeks). This might illustrate the seriousness of the situation in
the lake, as the water level continuously decreasing (according to the Environmental HQ of
Karbala’), in addition to the lack of water supply to this lake.
The lack of water recourse and the degradation of the plant cover over Razzaza Lake might be
of very seriously effects the wildlife in the area, and cause more massive death for the locallybreeding
species (including Fish and Mammals). So, from the faunal point of view, we strongly
recommend to think about supplying the lake with sufficient amounts of water, and to find the
way to circulate some sort of flow in the waterboody. Last, but not least, to target the area with
conservational and awareness raising program, plus, enhancing the coordination between the
Environmental HQ of the two governorates with the police to reduce the overhunting in the
lake.